in the Navajo. Cross the canyon and hike into that notch. (The notch is one-eighth mile northeast of elevation 5673T.)
From the notch, look south into the next canyon. You will see two canyons coming together in a "Y," with a twenty-foot pinnacle at their junction (one-eighth mile east-southeast of elevation 5673T). Descend a steep Kayenta wall to the south. The route is tricky; it has loose rock and may take some scouting (Class 4, lower packs). Descend the canyon on its left (LDC) side until you are below the pinnacle at the "Y." Cross the short canyon that forms the left arm of the "Y." There are large potholes in both canyons. Hike southeast to the top of the Wingate. There is excellent slickrock camping in the area. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Follow the top of the Wingate along the south edge of the canyon for an hour. (Scorpion Gulch map.) Locate a large, dominant, freestanding tower (elevation 5405T) on the opposite (W) side of the canyon. Several minutes past the tower you will be forced to the head of a short side canyon. From its top, look up to the east. The Navajo cliffs that have been to your left (S) end in a final tower that has two windows. Exit the canyon here by hiking to the top of the Kayenta ridge to the southeast (one-quarter mile east-northeast of elevation 5164T).
Descend Kayenta ledges south to the rim of another canyon (shown one-quarter mile south of elevation 5164T). Hike upcanyon along the rim of the canyon until you find a place to cross. The canyon does contain large potholes and there is good camping in the area. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
(Map Twenty-nine.) After crossing the canyon, follow its south rim west-southwest for a half hour to a notch to the south between the Navajo wall and a prominent dome, which is locally known as Yurt Dome (elevation 5441T, the one nearest the Escalante). Hike through the notch and descend Kayenta ledges south into a Wingate-lined drainage. Follow it west until you are on the rim of Escalante Canyon. Go southeast over a short ridge to the rim of a small canyon, head it, and return to the rim of Escalante Canyon.
Descend to the Escalante River
The route finding becomes even more tricky. Looking southwest, you will see a broken promontory of rock and a long talus slope extending northeast to southwest toward the Escalante River. (The promontory is shown one-quarter mile east of elevation 5095T and immediately south of a marked 4200-foot contour line.) Traverse southwest along the face of the escarpment, going up Kayenta ledges only as needed in order to make further progress. Look for a bighorn trail. After going about seventy-five feet above the Wingate,