Edward Abbey, after a hike into Stevens Canyon, wrote, "I walked a mile or so up Stevens Canyonrare, secret, lovely place it seemed." With its huge alcoves and overhangs, vast expanses of slickrock, and a delightful stream choked with luminous green moss, it is indeed a special canyon. Starting at the crest of the Waterpocket Fold, Stevens Canyon drains a vast area on its twenty-mile march to the Escalante River. The length of the canyon, difficult route finding, and a lack of water in its upper reaches have kept the hordes at bay. Early ranchers and later uranium prospectors found routes into the canyon from the Waterpocket Fold, but little sign of their presence remains.
Two hikes into Stevens Canyon country are presented. Both are long, difficult, and fraught with danger. Water sources are difficult to find, and tricky climbing in a remote setting adds spice to these classic routes.
The first route starts at the Fortymile Ridge trailhead, drops into Coyote Gulch, and goes up Stevens Canyon. It then exits the right side of the canyon and goes to the top of the Waterpocket Fold. A complicated route leads back to the Escalante River, across Fools Canyon, and into Coyote Gulch. It is followed back to the trailhead. An expanded version of this hike, including an exit out the top of Stevens Canyon, was detailed in Canyoneering 2: Technical Loop Hikes in Southern Utah.
The second route into Stevens Canyon country is presented in Hike #22.
Down Crack-in-the-Wall
(King Mesa map and Map Twenty-four.) From the trailhead, follow a sandy track northeast down a hill and across a plain. When the track ends, follow a line of cairns northeast to the edge of an escarpment overlooking the Escalante River. (Stevens Canyon South map and Map Twenty-five.) The cairns are regularly knocked over. If the route is not apparent, simply continue northeast across Navajo slickrock to the edge of the escarpment.
Historical note: The vague track you have been following was built by county officials in 1966 as part of a feasibility study for a proposed Trans-Escalante Federal Parkway road which would have tied Bullfrog Basin on Lake Powell to the town of Big Water in Arizona. For details on this road see the "Wilderness" chapter.
Locate a long fin of Navajo with a U-shaped gap extending northeast toward the river (shown one-half mile east of elevation 4484T). The Crack-in-the-Wall, a break in the Navajo, is 100 yards to the left (W) of the fin. After the first short drop it is most simple to lower packs down a twenty-five-foot wall rather than trying to squeeze them through the crack. Follow an established trail down a