another small canyon to the left (N) with two cottonwoods and a pinyon pine near its mouth (shown one-eighth mile south-southeast of elevation 5419AT.) A large cairn is immediately downcanyon in front of a large juniper tree. You will exit the canyon here. (If you go too far, the canyon ends in a fall.)
Exit the side canyon
Surmount a seven-foot wall (Class 4) behind the aforementioned pinyon pine and continue up the side canyon for a minute or so until it is possible to exit it by scrambling up steep ledges to the left (W) to the top of the Kayenta. There is a piece of the old cattle trail near the top. Follow the rim of the side canyon north, head it, and return to the rim of the main canyon. Continue upcanyon. In several more minutes, after passing a series of Navajo domes that are to the left (LUC), drop into the shallow upper part of the main canyon. Do not head it; instead, go northeast up the sand-floored canyon.
The canyon divides almost immediately. Stay to the right (NNE) (immediately north of the ''5" in elevation 5463AT). In about twelve minutes the canyon divides again, just before a split pinnacle. Stay to the right (E). Several minutes later the canyon divides again. Stay to the right (NE) for several paces; then follow a trail up a hill to the right (E).
At the top of the hill you will find yourself in a shallow drainage for 100 yards. The trail exits the drainage to the left (N) up a hillside and quickly enters another shallow drainage going east-northeast. The drainage goes generally northeast to the crest of the Waterpocket Fold. This section is confusing. If you miss the trail, do not panic! Simply wend your way northeast up draws and around domes until you are on the crest of the Waterpocket Fold. (You should end up on the top of the Waterpocket Fold between elevations 5642T and 5658T.) (3.0-4.5 hours.)
Historical note: As you walk along you will notice depressed areas containing innumerable flakes of chert, jasper, and chalcedony. These are called lithic scatters and are evidence of the Anasazi Indians who roamed the Waterpocket Fold during the late Basketmaker II period (approximately A.D. 500). The scatters consist of the chips left over when the Indians flaked larger pieces of rock into cutting tools, spear points, and scrapers. The base rock used for chipping was not available on the top of the Waterpocket Fold; it was carried from outcrops found in the Halls Creek area. Please leave the chips in place and do not collect them.
Digression: To locate the section of the Baker Trail that goes east down the cliffs to lower Halls Creek, first locate the small hill