Up middle Stevens Canyon
To continue up Stevens Canyon, backtrack from the pour-off for several hundred yards to the first rubble heap leading up the Wingate wall to the left (LDC)(E). Scramble up it, follow a wide ledge downcanyon for fifty yards, and ascend a steep slickrock ramp northeast to the top of the Wingate (Class 3 + ). Hike upcanyon (NE) on the top of the Wingate and along Kayenta ledges. Stay near the rim of the canyon. At the first corner note the rockslide coming down from the Navajo wall to the right. This huge section of rock fell in the summer of 1991.
Continue hiking on top of the Wingate for almost two hours.
Digression: The first steep slope dropping through the Wingate to the canyon bottom provides access to many medium potholes and short slots. There is excellent slickrock camping in the area. Do not continue up the floor of the canyon, since there is no easy exit out its top.
The trail descends the second steep slope back into the bottom of the canyon above a fall just as the Wingate wall to the right nearly disappears. Note the small natural bridge and large pothole at the top of the fall. (2.5-3.5 hours.)
In thirty minutes the canyon divides three ways (south-southwest of elevation 5087T). Watch carefully for this junction. It is somewhat hard to see. Turn left (W), staving in the main canyon. The canyon bottom is intermittently sand and slickrock floored. It has a seasonal flow of water and a string of inviting pools. In fifty minutes the canyon narrows for 100 yards. There are two large elongated potholes surrounded by slickrock--a perfect place for a break and a dip if the water is flowing. (Map Twenty-six.) It is important to recognize this area because the exit out of the canyon is a short way up and is hard to locate.
About nine minutes upcanyon from the elongated potholes the canyon turns right, from northwest to northeast. The Wingate wall to the right (E) is short and broken. At the far side of the corner a short section of constructed cattle trail is barely visible twenty-five feet above the ground. This is the Baker Trail and the exit route. (If you go too far upcanyon you will see a long straight stretch lined with grasses, willows, and cottonwoods that is marked as a spring one-quarter mile south-southwest of elevation 5170T on the map.) The spring has a large flow of water and there is camping in the area. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
Warning: The next part of the hike, along the Baker Trail to the top of the Waterpocket Fold, takes a long day that includes a lot of elevation gain, route-finding problems, and no water. Make sure you