prow, descend to the bottom of a canyon to the right (NW) by first hiking upcanyon for 200 yards, then zigzagging down steep ledges to the floor of the canyon (Class 4-). Follow the canyon into Fools Canyon.
Thrash your way up Fools Canyon through thick vegetation for ten minutes until you are above a huge deep poolthe ultimate swim hole if water is flowing. (Immediately above the pool the thrashing ends and the canyon floor becomes slickrock.) There is camping in the area. (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Exit Fools Canyon
Hike upcanyon from the swimming hole for 100 yards to a trail coming in on the left (SW). (The trail starts to the north of a side canyon that is shown to the north of elevation 4783.) This is an old constructed cattle trail and is easy to follow as it makes its way up the Kayenta and Navajo.
The trail disappears near the top. Hike southwest to the rim of the canyon. (1.0 hour.)
To King Mesa
From the rim you will be able to see King Mesa, a long flat-topped Navajo ridge to the west-southwest. On its left (S) side is a rounded slickrock hill (elevation 5026). The mesa itself is split by a pass (shown at elevation 5020) near its south end. Make your way west-southwest over, around, and through a maze of domes and washes to the pass. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Historical note: Les George Point, the area between King Mesa and Fools Canyon, was named for Leslie George, a rancher, mail carrier, and bishop in the local Mormon church. King Mesa was named for John King, who emigrated from Scotland and arrived in Escalante in 1893.
Down the Long Branch of Sleepy Hollow
Descend along the left (LDC) rim of a slot canyon that starts at the pass and goes south. This slot is called the Long Branch of Sleepy Hollow (LKA).
Note: Large potholes can be found in breaks in the slot and there is great camping along the slickrock. Remember, Coyote Gulch is being adversely impacted by campers. It is best to arrange your itinerary so you do not have to camp in Coyote Gulch.
The slot ends above lower Sleepy Hollow, a wide canyon with towering walls and a profusion of cottonwoods along its floor. Simply continue along the rim for another couple of minutes until you