The descent canyon
Go southwest down the shallow sand-floored canyon for twenty-five minutes to a fall. Pass it on the right (LDC). There are a couple of small, easily negotiated falls before you reach a string of large potholes that are 200 yards above an impassable fall. There is camping in the area. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
To pass the fall, backtrack for a couple of hundred yards to the top pothole and ascend a slope to the left (LUC)(W) to the foot of a Navajo ridge (elevation 6345T). Follow the base of the ridge upcanyon until you are between the second and third domes. The first two domes have rounded tops; the third is more pointed. Scramble up between the domes and negotiate a short wall behind a juniper (Class 4) to a saddle.
From the saddle, look south at a ridge that drops into a shallow canyon to the north. Make your way to the ridge, using the branches of a pinyon pine to help ascend a short slab (Class 4). Descend very steep slickrock into the canyon (Class 4). A short distance downcanyon is another drop. Pass it via a less-than-vertical crack on the right (Class 4+, 50', belay and lower packs). The Navajo walls and domes below are sublime.
At the next impassable fall there is a large reed-filled pothole. Exit the canyon up a short hillside to the right (NW) to a long thin saddle with fantastic views and excellent camping. The deep, impressive canyon to the north is Georges Camp Canyon (LKA). (1.5-3.0 hours.)
Historical note: Georges Camp Canyon was named for rancher George Davis, who had a line camp behind an abandoned meander at the mouth of the canyon. Davis, an immigrant from Wales, moved to the Escalante area at the turn of the century and homesteaded north of town in lower Pine Creek. A man of many interests, Davis built a dance hall in town in 1901, belonged to the local band and dramatic troupe, had an interest in the People's Exchange dry goods store, was a director of the Pine Creek Irrigation Company, and delivered mail to some towns north of Escalante.
Canyon-hopping to the Escalante
The route gets complicated. Pay close attention to the text and to your maps. Proceed to the north end of the saddle until you come against a Navajo dome. Descend a chute to the west. Traverse southwest, following a bighorn sheep trail along Kayenta ledges. (Do not drop to the top of the Wingate.) (Map Twenty-eight.) Scramble up to the first notch in the Navajo ridge to the left (S). The notch has a dome in its middle. (The notch is one-half mile east-northeast of elevation 5816T.) (1.0-1.5 hours.)
From the notch, look south across the canyon to another notch