right is rounded. Without a pack, hike to the top of the dome to the left (E). (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Into Fools Canyon
(King Mesa map.) Walk to the southeast end of the dome and look east-southeast. Before you is the deep, wide side canyon or bay. The tallest, bare-topped, somewhat-pointed dome is marked elevation 5165 on the map. To the right of it, a couple of miles in the background, is a flat, Carmel-topped dome (elevation 5170). (Map Thirty.) This dome is your goal. It is easiest to pass the initial jumble of domes at the head of the long side canyon or bay by passing around its backside and dropping on steep slickrock into the canyon. (It is shown as a small drainage west of elevations 5110 and 5058.) There is a large pothole a quarter mile down this canyon in a section of narrows. Hike up the canyon back to the rim.
Once you are past the domes, stay within 200 to 300 yards of the rim of Escalante Canyon, hiking on pleasant slickrock and across sandy plains until you reach the top of the aforementioned destination dome (elevation 5170). (1.5-2.0 hours)
Historical note: The area you are crossing, Ezra Mc Bench, was named for Ezra McInelly, a local rancher. The James McInelly family moved to Escalante in 1878 and built the first flour mill there. McInelly offspring, twelve in number, were active in the development of the area. Loral J. "Sixty" McInelly is credited with doing the initial bulldozer work on the Hell's Backbone roada daring featin 1933. Arthur McInelly carried mail over the new road to Boulder in the late 1940s, and Arthur and Wells McInelly prospected for uranium in the Circle Cliffs Basin in the early 1950s.
From the top of the dome go south-southeast across a juniper-studded plain and down steepening slickrock to a bowl with a long, prominent, southwest-running rib on its west side. (The bowl is immediately west of elevation 5010.) You will see a long peninsula of red Navajo Sandstone jutting southwest far into Fools Canyon on the south side of the bowl (shown one-third mile west of elevation 4827 and immediately north of a 4400-foot contour line).
Make your way to the top of the rib and descend it, traveling southwest into the bowl. Note the steps hacked into the rock to facilitate getting horses up and down. Walk to the south end of the bowl. A wide side canyon drops into Fools Canyon, and the long peninsula will be on the left (LDC)(E). To the right of center is a rubble heap that goes down the Navajo and into the canyon.
Do not drop to the bottom of the canyon; instead, follow a game trail down the right side of the canyon on a Kayenta bench until the Navajo ridge on the right ends at a prow. From the end of the