To Stevens Canyon
Wade down Coyote Gulch for ten minutes to its confluence with the Escalante River. Continue wading up the sand-bottomed Escalante River and under Stevens Arch to Stevens Canyon, the first canyon to the right (E). (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Alternate route: This route must be used if the water level in Lake Powell is high. From the bottom of the sand dune trail, hike up Coyote Gulch for about fifteen minutes to the first area of campsites on the right (LUC)(N). They are ten feet above the canyon floor and are shaded by huge cottonwoods. A large spring flows from a wall 100 yards farther upstream on the right.
From the downcanyon end of the campsite locate an established and cairned trail zigzagging up Kayenta ledges to the north. The trail turns northeast and traverses a talus slope to a saddle on a peninsula across from Stevens Arch (at elevation 3967T). The trail turns northwest. Follow it for ten minutes to the first side canyon dropping to the Escalante River (SE) (shown one-eighth mile east of elevation 4542T). You intersect the canyon before passing the fin containing Stevens Arch. Follow a cairned route down the canyon to the river.
Should the lake be particularly full, continue traversing upcanyon to the next side canyon. This canyon is hard to descend (Class 4) and has an almost impenetrable barrier of vegetation at its mouth. Wade up the Escalante River to Stevens Canyon. (Add 1.0 hour.)
Up lower Stevens Canyon
Do not remove your wading shoes yet. The first mile of Stevens Canyon has a half-dozen or more crossings and is a bit of a thrash. Pass the first deep pool on the left (LUC) by climbing a stack of rocks and a row of Moqui-style steps (Class 5.0, 20', belay and hand up or haul packs). Go by the second pool on the right. Hikers have built a pyramid of rocks to ease the difficulty (Class 4+, 12'). The wading comes to an end after another quarter mile. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
In fifteen minutes a trail goes up a slippery, poison-ivy-choked rockslide. Before negotiating the hill, visit the Grotto, fifty yards to the left (LUC)(W). It is an exquisite alcove with a pool at its base topped by Hanging Arch, a unique natural bridge. Above the rockslide, the canyon is intermittently dry.
The route continues up Stevens Canyon. It passes a nice side canyon (shown to the north of elevation 4819T) coming in from the right (E). There are occasional poison ivy patches, willow and tamarisk thickets, and other small obstacles to overcome. The bushwhacking ends in an area of wonderfully fluted slickrock and varnished Wingate walls.
At the end of the slickrock the canyon is blocked by a pour-off