Cistern Canyon is the first canyon to the east of Ramp Canyon. To get to it follow the track toward Ramp Canyon until you are close to its head, then go northeast up a steep slope. Stay parallel to a Wingate wall and below the Chinle. From the top of the slope follow a steep, shallow, red-walled gully east down to Cistern Canyon.
Hike south down Cistern Canyon to Bullberry Spring. There is good camping in an area of cottonwoods near this small spring. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
Water: This is normally a dry camp. Water has to be carried from your cache near the Hidden Splendor road or from Muddy Creek. If you do not have enough water and Bullberry Spring is dry, continue south down Cistern Canyon. There are medium potholes throughout the canyon. If everything is dry, proceed to the large spring at the mouth of Quandary Canyon. See Day Three for details.
Day Three. 5.0 to 8.0 hours. Hunt Draw map. There is reliable water at the mouth of Quandary Canyon and in Muddy Creek.
Down Cistern Canyon
(Hunt Draw map.) Go south down Cistern Canyon. As the red Wingate walls rise, note the superb weathering of the sandstone. By the time you pass under a huge chockstone you are in the Navajo. The canyon itself presents small challenges but no big problems. You will pass through the Carmel Formation as you exit the Southern Reef. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Geology lesson: This is a good opportunity to take a minute to look at the Southern Reef. Note how the sandstone layers are tilted at an angle, at times almost reaching the vertical. These sandstone layers, or strata, were at one time horizontal. They were formed when the forces of wind and water carried sand from eastern highlands to their present location. The sand was deposited in freshwater lakes, along the shores of ancient seas, or in vast desert areas similar to the present-day Sahara. The unique characteristics of the various formations are due to the point of origin of the sand and silt and the diversity of the depositional environment.
Fifty to sixty million years ago pressures like an expanding