mouth of the canyon is choked with vegetation, the pools are worth the trouble to reach them.
Continue southwest along the base of the reef for a half-hour to Muddy Creek. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
To Hidden Splendor
Follow Muddy Creek upcanyon. It cuts through the reef in an awesome display of Wingate and Navajo walls. There is a lot of wading, but even in high water the creek is usually no more than knee deep.
Digression: The first side canyon to the right (E) after entering the reef is partially blocked by a wall of tamarisks. Five minutes up the side canyon is a large pool. Since you will be camping on Muddy Creek, you may want to obtain fresh water here. (The side canyon is shown one-quarter mile south of elevation 4990T.)
Mine shafts and an old building appear on the right (LUC) as you approach the Hidden Splendor mining area. (Hidden Splendor is not labeled on the map. It is one-half mile west of elevation 4888T.) A couple of tracks run east up the cliffs to the mine site, but there isn't much to see. (2.0-3.0 hours.)
Historical note: Vernon Pick, a novice prospector from Minnesota, discovered uranium at Hidden Splendor in 1952. The story of his discovery is interesting. After a business setback in Minnesota, Pick and his wife decided to move to California. On the way, he heard about the uranium rush in Utah. Hoping to get in on the boom, Pick drove to Hanksville. He spent six months searching without success for uranium near the San Rafael Swell.
Nearly out of money, Vernon decided to give prospecting one last try before continuing on to the coast. He examined Crack and Chute canyons, then headed for Muddy Creek. He was only able to drive to within fifteen miles of the creek, so he hiked cross-country the rest of the way. Muddy Creek was swollen by recent rains and, after a struggle, Pick finally reached the Hidden Splendor area.
Using his scintillometera type of Geiger counterPick discovered a fertile lode of uranium-bearing ore. After marking his claim, which he named the Delta Mine, he