Skill level:
This is a moderately strenuous route. The first day, hiking through The Chute, is the hardest and longest day. There is moderate route finding and there is one optional section of Class-4 climbing. Water may be scarce along some sections of the route. There may be one dry camp. There is a lot of wading on this route, but the water is rarely more than knee deep; however, there is the possibility of several short swims if water levels are high.
Special equipment:
Wading shoes are essential. An old pair of hiking boots is recommended. Tennis shoes do not supply enough sup- port. At least one inner tube per group should be carried for floating packs if water levels are high. Large plastic bags are indispensable for keeping equipment dry. Each member of the party should have a walking stick to probe for deep water. Sticks are available all along the river. The lead person should not carry a camera! A forty-foot rope will prove useful. Each hiker should have a minimum water-carrying capacity of six quarts. Even when the air is hot, the narrows can be chilly. Be prepared.
Notes:
The Chute of Muddy Creek and Chimney Canyon are both highly favored destinations for backpackers. Carry out your toilet paper when in these areas.
It is recommended that you leave a water cache near the Hidden Splendor road. This is easy to do and will save you from having to carry water from Muddy Creek. Two gallons of water cached per person is suggested. Two food caches can also be placed along the route. Directions on where to place the caches are detailed in the road section. Rodents are not a big problem when placing food caches in the San Rafael Swell, but it is advisable to bury your food in plastic bags or containers. Remember to carry out your containers or retrieve them later. Erase all signs of your caches.
Administering agency:
San Rafael Resource Area. Bureau of Land Management. 900 N. 700 E. Price, Utah 84501. (801-637-4584)
Land status:
The Chute, upper Chimney Canyon, and Mud Canyon are in the Muddy Creek WSA. Cistern Canyon is in the