mid-1950s, pushed roads into nearly every corner of the Circle Cliffs Basin.
Burr Trail Road Section
Access to Hikes #30 through 37. 

Access is from Highway 12.

Provides access to the Lamp Stand road, Wolverine Loop roadthe 

     Western Entrance, and Wolverine Loop roadthe Eastern En-

     trance (the Moody road).

MapsBoulder Town, Calf Creek, King Bench, Steep Creek Bench, 

     Lamp Stand, Bitter Creek Divide, and Wagon Box Mesa.
The Burr Trail starts at milepost 87.1 on Highway 12 (located one-eighth mile north-northeast of elevation 6794 on the Boulder Town map). The road is suitable for light-duty vehicles to the Capitol Reef National Park boundary at mile 30.5, which marks the end of the pavement. Beyond that point, light-duty vehicles may not be able to continue. High-clearance vehicles are recommended. The dirt portion of the road may be impassable after rains. This is a long road. Make sure to carry plenty of gas and water. There is camping near the road. (See Map Thirty-eight.)
0.0
On Highway 12 at the Burr Trail junction. A sign reads "Boulder-Bull Frog Scenic Road." Go east.
2.5
(Calf Creek map.) Cattle guard. The occasional large evergreens are ponderosa pines. The white checkerboard wall to the right is Navajo Sandstone topped with brownish Carmel Formation limestone.
6.2
(King Bench map.) Start of Deer Creek Hike #30. Signed Deer Creek crossing. Just before the creek is a parking area and trail register on the right. Past the creek on the left is a small BLM campground. It has outhouses, picnic tables, and trash barrels, but there is no drinking water. You are at the crossing shown between "Deer" and "Creek" on the map. You are in Navajo Sandstone.
7.1
Top of a hill.
7.5
Yellow fifteen-miles-per-hour sign on the right.
7.9
Start of Steep Creek and Hot Canyon Hike #31. "Tee." A short track to the left (NE) starts just before a Navajo dome that is right next to the road. There is parking past the dome. The dome is located one-quarter mile north-northwest of elevation 6177.
10.1
Start of The Gulch and Horse Canyon Hike #32. Short road