the boat grounded in a rocky riffle. We got out to push and pull the rafts over the rocksand never returned to the boats as passengers for eight days. The water that was expected to swell the stream flow as we continued our journey never appeared . . . The oars we carried were never unleashed until we reached the Colorado River."
Although the trip was exceptionally difficult for the five-person team, Henderson considered it a success. In summation he wrote: "Perhaps in a less colorful setting the arduous labor of this journey would have made it a grim, dismal experience. But not in Escalante Canyon. The red Wingate and the Navajo sandstone walls which towered above us fringed with the deep green of junipers and pinyon were ever-changing backdrops of fantastic sculpturing . . . In such a setting, with congenial companionsI never heard an unkind word, even when the going was very toughwe trudged along, dragging our boats and feeling that here was an experience which would leave pleasant memories long after the tired muscles had been forgotten."
The Escalante River is rarely in "nick" for a river run. Flow rates high enough to float a small boat only happen every four or five years. Often one must ride the crest of the spring runoff and hope it does not subside when partway down. Rafts are too large for this small river and most negotiate its tortuous course in kayaks or single-person inflatables.
The standard put-in for a run down the Escalante River is at the Highway 12 bridge and the normal takeout is via Crack-in-the-Wall to the Fortymile Ridge trailhead. Plan on seven to nine days for the trip. Familiarize yourself with other exit routes out of the canyon just in case things do not go as planned. The shortest optional exit is Fence Canyon to the Egypt trailhead.
It takes most river runners two trips over the course of a long day to carry their gear from the river to the Fortymile Ridge trailhead. If you are lucky, willing hikers may give a hand. A forty-foot rope will help pull boats up the cliff at Crack-in-the-Wall.
Highway 12 Road Section
Access to Hikes #4 through 9. 

Provides access to the Hells Backbone road, Hole-in-the-Rock road, 

Old Sheffield road, and the Burr Trail. 

Maps-Escalante, Dave Canyon, Tenmile Flat, Calf Creek, and 

Boulder Town.
Highway 12 is the major road cutting across Escalante country. All of the hikes presented in the guide either originate along the highway or from roads that branch from it. Since Highway 12 does