cross three passes. Though there is some steep slab climbing, most of the route is along pleasant and spectacular Wingate and Kayenta benches. This route is highly recommended.
Instead of crossing Fold Canyon, continue down its right (N) rim for 200 yards to its confluence with the Middle Fork (shown to the north of elevation 5648T). Hike upcanyon along the Wingate rim for a short distance until you are forced up onto the Kayenta. Drop back to the Wingate when possible. A steep slickrock slab (Class 4) leads to the floor of the canyon and its many large potholesthe biggest in the area.
Hike upcanyon. At one point, a worn row of Moqui steps leads up a short wall and around a deep pool on its left (LUC) side. At the confluence with a small side canyon that comes in on the left (NW) (shown one-eighth mile south-southeast of elevation 5913T), climb a steep slab to the north to the top of the Wingate. Follow the left rim of the side canyon for a couple of minutes until a pass in the Navajo is visible to the west-northwest. Hike through the pass (shown one-quarter mile south-southwest of elevation 5913T). (1.0-1.5 hours.)
From the pass, follow a small drainage southwest down to the rim of the North Fork (shown to the north of elevation 5913T). Staying on the Wingate, follow the rim upcanyon for a couple of miles. Above a large fall the canyon becomes shallower. Drop into the canyon, which soon divides. Follow the right fork, then hike northeast up the Kayenta to the second pass (shown one-eighth mile northeast of elevation 6327T). This pass is locally known as Bob's Way. The bowl of upper Stevens Canyon is now before you to the east. (2.0-2.5 hours.)
Hike south along Kayenta ledges to the pass that marks the head of Fold Canyon. Follow your previous route down to your campsite. (2.5-3.5 hours.)
Continue hiking down Fold Canyon, but now on its left (S) rim. Stay on top of the Wingate. Medium potholes can be found in many of the short side drainages that you must head.
Digression: A short distance before crossing the only sand dune you will encounter you can enter Fold Canyon by way of a steep gully, which provides unlimited opportunities for exploration. There are large potholes and fine camping sites in the canyon.
To the Overland Route: At this point you have intersected the section of the Overland Route that goes between Scorpion Gulch and Fold Canyon.
You will intersect the escarpment that overlooks the Escalante River on a point. (Map Thirty.) The sharp bend in the river formed by the point was called the Swan Neck Bend by uranium miners. (You leave the Stevens Canyon North map, cross a corner of the