a stretch of splendid narrows and idyllic swim holes. You can probably spot both brown and rainbow trout in the pools. The narrows are a trial to negotiate and are presented below as a digression. Most will want to hike around the narrows. (1.0 hour.)
Around the narrows
From the start of the narrows, backtrack for 100 yards. Locate a steep crease in the cross-stratified Navajo sandstone wall on the right (LUC)(E). (Map Forty.) This is the only break in the wall in this vicinity. The crease (Class 4+, 60') provides egress from the canyon. Good camping is available on the slickrock above the canyon. (The crease is located just upcanyon from where a "Tanks" drainage shown on the map enters Boulder Creek.)
To the Overland Route: This crease marks the point where the section of the Overland Route that goes between Highway 12 and Silver Falls Creek exits Boulder Creek.
Digression: The trip through the narrows is short, exciting, and entails moderate stretches of swimming. Once through, return to the top of the narrows by exiting the canyon to the left (LDC), walking the rim upcanyon, and descending via the aforementioned crease. (1.5-2.5 hours round-trip.)
Follow the rim of the canyon down for ten minutes or until you can see the end of the narrows. A trail down a draw leads back to Deer Creek. Below, the canyon narrows for short stretches in a couple of places, forming deep pools. Most can climb around them (Class 5.0, 25'), but some may need to float packs across on inner tubes. There is poor camping at the junction with the Escalante River, but good campsites appear a short distance downcanyon. (3.0-4.0 hours.)
Down the Escalante River
Follow a good trail along the Escalante River for fifteen minutes to a barb-wire fence. Two minutes past the fence, the trail crosses the river. One hundred yards downcanyon and partway around a corner locate a constructed cattle trail on the left (N). You will leave the river here. Water sources are now far apart and are located a distance from the route. Load up with water. (0.5 hours.)
Follow the trail through a barb-wire gate to an old line shack on the top of the hill.
To the Overland Route: You can join the section of the Overland Route that goes between Highway 12 and Silver Falls Creek at the line shack. The location of the line shack is shown as a small black square and is correctly placed on the USGS map. The trail from the