sandstone that is up to 130 feet thick. It was formed after a considerable period of widespread erosion in the same environment as the Navajo Sandstone. Although it is a contemporary of the lower part of the younger Carmel Formation, it is so similar to the older Navajo Sandstone that the two were not differentiated by geologists until recently. Naturally, this similarity makes it difficult to tell the two apart.
The erosional surface between the Navajo and the overlying Page Sandstone is characterized by a thin layer of light-colored angular chert pebbles. It is necessary to locate this layer in order to identify the contact surface between the Navajo and the Page. Because of the general obscurity of the contact, references to Navajo Sandstone in the descriptions of the hikes will mean an undifferentiated Navajo Sandstone and Page Sandstone. The one exception is in Hike #8, where the Geologist's note points out the contact surface.
The Carmel Formation is horizontal-bedded and up to 300 feet thick. It was formed by a marine incursion into vast sand dunes during an arid period. Red to brown siltstone layers are intermixed with gypsum beds and limestone layers that often contain marine fossils. It forms sloping ledges that are often unstable to walk on.
Entrada Sandstone in the Escalante area is in a transition zone. It is usually cross-bedded and looks like a red to dark-red Navajo or Wingate sandstone. But, in some places, it has become interbedded with siltstone and mudstone that were deposited on coastal flats around lagoons. In these areas the Entrada has weathered into slopes and into "hoodoos," or "goblins" which are short towers or pinnacles. In the Escalante region Entrada Sandstone is 700 to 1,000 feet thick and is found only on the west side of Escalante Canyon. Good examples of Entrada Sandstone are Dance Hall Rock, the Sooner Rocks, and Devils Garden.
Note: Throughout the manuscript the descriptions of the various formations have been shortened; for example, "a Wingate wall" instead of "a wall of Wingate Sandstone" or "walk along the Kayenta" instead of "walk along a Kayenta Formation ledge."