suitable only for exceptionally experienced canyoneers who are in excellent physical condition. Knowledge of low-impact camping skills is essential.
Special equipment:
Wading shoes or boots. An eighty-foot rope is essential. Have the capacity to carry at least two gallons of water per person.
Note:
You will spend a couple of days walking along sloping slickrock with your ankles turned to the side. Many will find this uncomfortable; others may find it debilitating.
Land status:
This hike is in Glen Canyon National Recreation Area.
This hike is a shorter and slightly easier variation of the Stevens Canyon and the Waterpocket Fold Hike #21. Instead of exiting the right side of Stevens Canyon and traversing the Waterpocket Fold, this route exits Stevens Canyon on the left. It then enters Fold Canyon, which is followed to the Escalante River. A circuitous route out of Escalante Canyon below Fools Canyon leads to Coyote Gulch and back to the trailhead.
Use the description in Hike #21 to get from the Fortymile Ridge trailhead to the Baker Trail exit in Stevens Canyon. It will take 10.0 to 15.0 hoursor two daysto reach this point. The route description picks up from the start of the Baker Trail.
To Fold Canyon
(Stevens Canyon South map and Map Twenty-four.) From the start of the Baker Trail continue up Stevens Canyon. (Map Twenty-six.) In seven minutes pass a side canyon coming in from the right (NE); huge cottonwoods partially obscure its mouth. Stay in the main canyon to the left (NNW) (west of elevation 5170T). The next section of canyon contains lots of vegetation and many large springs; the going can be tough.
In another thirty minutes a boulder-filled side canyon comes in from the right (NE) (shown to the west of elevation 5546T on the Stevens Canyon North map) . Stay in the main canyon to the left (NW). In another ten minutes a side canyon comes in on the right (N) (shown to the east of elevation 5201T). There is a mining claim written on a boulder at its mouth. Follow the main canyon to the left (W). The vegetation and springs soon end.
In another fifty-five minutes two canyons enter from the rightthe first from the northeast, the second from the north. (They are located to the south-southeast of elevation 5277T.) The Chinle Formation is visible at this junction. A mining claim painted on a boulder near the mouth of the canyon states, ''Triple Kay Exp. June No. 1"