gradient steepens and the wash enters a slot. This is the main drainage that flows into Hurricane Wash. (The drainage is shown to the north of elevation 4556.) Short sections of slot are interspersed with sandy washes. Rather than climbing through the slot, stay along its right (LDC) rim, skirting towers and scrambling over slickrock hills as necessary.
The slot turns into a deep gorge and intersects a wide sandy wash. A steep route down the slickrock at the confluence leads to the floor of the wash, as also do several easier slopes to the right. Follow the route downcanyon for a couple of minutes to Hurricane Wash. (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Down Hurricane Wash
You have intersected Hurricane Wash just as it gets interesting. The Navajo walls slowly build and narrow. Water starts flowing a half hour downcanyon and cottonwood-shaded benches make good campsites. Coyote Gulch, with its larger flow of water, comes up in a rush. There is good camping in the vicinity. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Down Coyote Gulch
As you head down Coyote Gulch look for several rows of Moqui steps that lead out of the canyon on both sides. They are challenging to locate. The walking is serene along a trail that constantly crosses the creek. Arcadian stands of cottonwoods and enormous alcoves line the way. The canyon quickly constricts as it enters a stretch of ''goosenecks,' or tight meanders. Jacob Hamblin Arch has been cleaved by wind and water from a long fin of sandstone. Popular campsites proliferate in this area and a pit toilet is located a couple of hundred yards upcanyon from the arch on the left (LDC). (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Historical note: Jacob Hamblin Arch was originally named Lobo Arch by early ranchers out of respect for an old desert wolf that used to roam the area. The name Jacob Hamblin Arch was first suggested to local guide Burnett Hendricks by a man measuring silt on the Escalante River. Hendricks later mentioned the name to persons on a National Geographic expedition down Coyote Gulch in 1955. Robert Moore, a member of that expedition, described Jacob Hamblin Arch: "It looked to us as if a giant had thrust a fist through the rock wall to provide a peephole through which he might view the canyon beyond."
Jacob Hamblin, often called the "Mormon Leatherstocking," was sent to southern Utah in the 1850s by the head of the Mormon church, Brigham Young. Hamblin was the first Mormon missionary to visit the area and to befriend the local Indians. He was also a scout and an explorer who proved invaluable to John Wesley Powell during the latter's Colorado River adventures.