fork is less abundantly watered but does have small springs. Below the confluence of the forks are superb pools carved into the slickrock. It is an easy hike to the lake.
Access to Fence Canyon is from the mouth of Cow Canyon. Even in high water the traverse above the lake is no problem. Fence Canyon has plenty of water, good camping, and no exit routes.
Bowns Canyon
Bowns Canyon has several entrance points. The easiest is via the Bowns Trail, which is an extension of the Black Trail. (See Hike #29 for the history of the Black Trail.) The Bowns Trail exits the east fork of Bowns Canyon near its top (one-half mile north-northeast of elevation 4408AT on the Stevens Canyon South map).
Historical note: William Bown established the Box Bar Ranch on Sandy Creek near the town of Notom to the northeast. According to his grandson Casey Bown, William Bown used both Long and Bowns canyons as winter range between 1909 and 1913. William called this once-fertile valley Meadow Canyon. He is credited with building the Bowns Trail out of the east fork of Bowns Canyon to its intersection with the Baker Trail at the top of the Waterpocket Fold. (See Map Thirty-seven and Hike #21 for information on the Baker Trail.)
The Henry Mountain Oil Company used the Bowns Trail from 1920 to 1921 to bring supplies for its drilling activities from the Baker Ranch in Halls Creek to Oil Seep Bar near the mouth of Long Canyon. Horse packers still occasionally use the Baker and Bowns trails.
A horse ladder that descends an unbelievably spectacular sheet of steep slickrock provides entrance to the main fork of Bowns Canyon on its west side. (The ladder is located east-northeast of elevation 4465AT on the Stevens Canyon South map.) There is plenty of water in Bowns Canyon.
Long Canyon
From the mouth of Bowns Canyon above Lake Powell an old horse trail follows Kayenta ledges into Long Canyon.
Digression: As you hike between the canyons you may find the remnants of an old constructed trail that goes down to Lake Powell.
An exit from Long Canyon to the west is via a very steep, exposed slab (Class 5.0, 90') (one-eighth mile south of elevation 4692T on The Rincon NE map) . You can exit Long Canyon directly east of the western entrance by way of a steep slope and a hidden passage through the Navajo cliffs.