half mile west of elevation 6270AT on the Deer Point map.) From the pass, Deer Point is visible to the north. (2.0-3.0 hours.)
To the trailhead
The mining track winds north down a Chinle hill past several mine shacks into a wash. It exits the wash on the left (W) (hard to see) and continues above the inner gorge of Middle Moody Canyon. You will see the trailhead on the opposite side of the gorge. Drop into the aforementioned drainage that is directly across from the trailhead and near the horizontal cave. There is one place along the ledge system that may require lowering packs a couple of feet. (2.0-3.0 hours.)
Part 2: Down the Escalante River
(Scorpion Gulch map and Map Forty-seven.) From the mouth of East Moody Canyon hike and wade down the Escalante River. In fifteen minutes a large abandoned meander on the left proves interesting to walk around (shown at elevation 4745T). Forty-five minutes past it, after making first a left bend, then a right bend, look for a white Navajo tower with an archlet or window on its left side high above the river to your left. It will disappear from view as you go under it. You will walk to this tower later. (The white Navajo tower is located halfway between elevations 5022T and 4807T, at the neck of a ''dog bone" bend in the river.)
The river makes another right bend, then a quick left turn (shown one-quarter mile south of elevation 4795T.) It then straightens out and goes southeast for a quarter mile. Watch for a triangular-shaped cliff dune on the right (SW) side of the river that ends at the edge of a cliff forty feet above the water. It is the only cliff dune in the vicinity. Across the river (E) from the cliff dune is a wide ledge that goes upcanyon (NW) above a cliff band. (2.0-2.5 hours.)
The exit route
Walk upcanyon along the ledge past a cave, then ascend a slot (Class 4+, 20'). Proceed upcanyon on the next ledge until stopped by a precipice overlooking the river. A 100-foot slab above the drop contains a row of Moqui steps. They may not be apparent until you start climbing (Class 5.1, 100'). Belays should be used and packs can be hauled.
Hike northeast out of the canyon and along a Kayenta ridge to the white Navajo archlet tower mentioned earlier. There are expansive views of the river in two directions. The white-and-red domes and walls to the northwest and northeast are in the Navajo. (0.5-1.5 hours.)
Follow the Kayenta ridge north-northeast (over elevation