colder the water, the longer you'll have to let it sit. The basic rule when using iodine is to either use a little and let it work for a long period of time or use a lot and wait for a shorter period. If you let the water sit overnight, you will just have to add one or two drops of iodine per quart. If the taste of iodine-treated water is objectionable, treat the water as prescribed, then take the lid off the water container. The iodine taste will somewhat dissipate. Some people get a sore throat from using iodine.
Iodine tablets such as Potable-Aqua and crystals of iodine (Polar Pure) work well but are expensive. Always use fresh iodine tablets; they lose their effectiveness after prolonged exposure to air.
Chlorine and halazone. These compounds are effective against viruses and bacteria. They will not kill Giardia.
Filters. A good filter can make dirty, scummy, muddy water palatable. The only filter I recommend for desert travel is the Katadyn Pocket Filter. It is initially expensive, and it is heavy, but the filter cartridge will last the average hiker a lifetime. The Katadyn is the only filter on the market that is easy to clean in the field. Hint: Before trying to filter muddy water, first strain it through a disposable coffee filter or let the sediment settle for a couple of hours.
Skill level: Do not kid yourself here. Have an idea of your capabilities. Realize that if you are not prepared mentally and physically for some of the routes you could get yourself and your party into serious trouble. For those new to the canyon country, start with shorter, easier hikes. Get a feel for the terrain, your reaction to it, and problems that off-trail hiking presents.
Difficulties in route finding can take several forms. Interpreting the guide and matching it with what you see admittedly can be confusing. Picking your way up or down steep ledges or in and out of canyon systems can be frustrating and time consuming. The 7.5 minute maps have contour intervals of forty feet. A thirty-five-foot cliff will not be shown on the map. After a 500-foot hike up a steep, loose, and troublesome slope it is not fun to find a twenty-foot cliff blocking progress. A hundred dead-end canyons were hiked in preparing this guide so you would not have to hike them.
A compass is essential when using the guide. Do not count on your innate sense of direction to get you through. A couple of sharp turns in a sinuous canyon and you will be confused. Inexpensive compasses work as well as expensive ones.
Some of the routes in the guide are technical, requiring the use of climbing ropes and other specialized equipment. Unless you have extensive experience using this equipment, stay away from the technical routes. Proper techniques can be learned by attending a climbing school.
The Yosemite Decimal System is used to describe the roughness of the terrain. This system has been used for years by hikers and