drainage is below you. The second drainagea wide tree-covered valleyhas a forty-foot tower just below its left (E) rim near its top.
If you try to enter Hot Canyon too far upcanyon you will find yourself in a steep slot that you cannot get through. This slot does contain medium potholes that you can reach. Descend steep slopes that are due east of the middle of the hill that is at elevation 7584 into Kayenta-walled Hot Canyon. There are many options. (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Down Hot Canyon
Hot Canyon, like Steep Creek, is quite uniform throughout its length, making it difficult to keep track of where you are on the map. The following landmarks will help you keep track of your progress. After about two hours the wall on the left, which was not too tall before, rises, becomes vertical, and changes color to dirty white for a short distance. This wall is obvious. Shortly below it the canyon widens and you will encounter the first cottonwood trees. Small springs may also appear.
Twenty minutes downcanyon from the dirty white wall, look for a large white Navajo escarpment in the distance to the right (LDC). It is the first plainly visible escarpment you will see from the canyon floor. (This is elevation 6969.) A couple of minutes later a side canyon enters on the right (N) (shown at the "C" in Canyon). If you are not sure if this is the correct canyon, walk up it for a few paces and locate a double-fist-sized hole in the wall ten feet off the deck on the right. (2.5-3.0 hours.)
The main canyon now becomes crowded with vegetation. In thirty minutes another drainage enters on the right (WNW). This one is really hard to see, as the low cliffs become even lower, at least along the right side of the canyon. A very thick stand of tamarisks, the first such stand encountered, starts here. If you are still unsure you are in the right place, hike up a hillside to the right (NW) and look at the cliff across the canyon to the south-southeast. Locate a small triangular-shaped cave high on the cliff. (0.5 hours.)
Exit Hot Canyon
Hike downcanyon for five minutes and exit the canyon to the left (SE). There are a couple of options. (Exit to the southeast of the "H" in Hot.)
Note: Do not continue downcanyon to Deer Creek. Although this appears tempting on the map, there is private property ahead. Please respect the privacy and private property rights of others.
From the top of a sandy ridge look southeast. Before you is a small drainage. Behind it is a lopsided triangular-shaped dome (ele-