forest into Egg Canyon. Pioneers initially called it Egg Box Canyon. The derivation is not known. Work your way down a deep ravine cut into the Chinle Formation to The Gulch. (Steep Creek Bench map.) (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Digression: To visit Lamanite Arch, hike up The Gulch for a half hour to the first side canyon that enters on the left (NW) (shown to the west of elevation 6912). This canyon is Indian Trail Gulch (LKA). It contains medium springs and is a thrash to get up, though cattle trails do help. Lamanite Arch takes forty-five minutes to reach and is located on a Wingate cliff to the right (LUC)(E). Mormons believe that "Lamanites" were the ancestors of the American Indians. Return the way you came to the mouth of Egg Canyon. (2.5-3.5 hours.)
The return canyon
Hike down The Gulch for twenty minutes to the first canyon that enters on the left (ENE). Follow this easy canyon to a pass at its upper end. (Lamp Stand map.) Near the top you will find a constructed trail. From the pass look north-northeast. A quarter mile away you will see the head of a canyon marked by a short vertical white cliff (Shinarump Member of the Chinle Formation). Descend the wash below you toward the canyon. Before reaching it, intersect a track that cuts over the head of the canyon. Follow the track to the left (N). It dithers about for ten minutes, then divides. You have now rejoined the original route. The Pink Pass will be visible to the left (WSW). Follow the track to the right (NE) back to the start. (2.0-3.0 hours.)
Wolverine Loop RoadThe Eastern Entrance Road Section
This is also called the Moody road. 

Access to Hikes #35 through 37. 

Access is from the Burr Trail. 

MapsWagon Box Mesa, Horse Pasture Mesa, and Deer Point.
The Wolverine Loop roadthe Eastern Entrance starts 28.8 miles down the Burr Trail at the Wolverine Loop road sign (located at elevation 6767T on the Wagon Box Mesa map) This graded road is suitable for high-clearance vehicles except after recent rains. Then even 4WDs will have problems. There is camping along the road. (See Map Thirty-eight.)
0.0
On the Burr Trail. Go south.
2.4
Huge sand pile on the right.