make your own. Be exceptionally careful with garbage. Carry out more than you brought in. You must carry out your toilet paper and leftover food when in Coyote Gulch!
Land status:
This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument and Glen Canyon National Recreation Area.
Like James Joyce's difficult novel Ulysses, Coyote Gulch with its many superlative side canyons and slot-like tributaries, several arches, a massive natural bridge, waterfalls, and towering walls draped with variegated varnish takes many visits over a period of years to fully understand and appreciate. Once used by Anasazi and Fremont Indians during the growing season, Coyote Gulch has become the canyon to which all others in southern Utah are compared.
One problem with exploring Coyote Gulch in the past has been that the standard routes into it-Red Well, Dry Fork Coyote, Hurricane Wash, and Fortymile Ridge-force the explorer to hike the length of the canyon twice, which essentially doubles the human load in the canyon. This loop hike eliminates that problem.
Note: Some may want to explore lower Coyote Gulch-from Jacob Hamblin Arch to the Escalante River-without hiking through the upper canyon. I recommend you do this in reverse order by going down Crack-in-the-Wall, hiking up Coyote Gulch, and exiting at Jacob Hamblin Arch. This keeps you from down-climbing the steep slab at the arch, which is very dangerous.
The route comes in two parts. Part 1 starts on the crest of Fortymile Ridge, enters Hurricane Wash just as it starts to narrow, and follows it down to Coyote Gulch. A climb out of Coyote Gulch near Jacob Hamblin Arch, which is halfway down the canyon, takes one back to the trailhead.
Part 2 continues downcanyon from Jacob Hamblin Arch to the Escalante River and returns to the trailhead via Crack-in-the-Wall.
Part 1: To Hurricane Wash
(King Mesa map and Map Twenty-three.) Before you start the hike look north-northeast and spot two squat domes. (The dome on the left is at elevation 4843.) For those doing Part 1, you will hike between these domes at the end of the hike.
From the trailhead you can see Chimney Rock, a lone pinnacle on a flat plain in the distance to the west-northwest. Hike across a blackbrush-covered plain and over a low rise toward Chimney Rock. Descend slickrock into a very wide bowl and follow any one of the small washes downhill. The washes, turning sharply and often, slowly funnel together. Pass a small arch perched atop a tower. The