til the narrows end, then follow a sandy wash northeast. It skirts around the east side of a very long north-running Navajo escarpment and dies in the slickrock. Your goal is to follow the east side of the escarpment north for many miles. Stay within a couple of hundred yards of the cliff; you will encounter serious obstacles if you do not. This long, lovely escarpment is broken in places by domes, towers, and turrets and is easy to follow.
A couple of landmarks along the route below the escarpment will help you keep track of your progress. First, you will pass over a brush fence that is located one-eighth mile east of elevation 5973. Immediately to the east is a canyon (with a labeled ''Tank" on the map). A constructed cattle trail leads into the canyon, which contains medium pools near both of its heads. (2.0-2.5 hours.)
Digression: If water is a problem, follow the "Tank" canyon down for a half hour to The Gulch, which has a perennial flow.
The second landmark is a labeled "Spring" an hour north of the "Tank." It rarely contains water, but a gap in the escarpment to the left (SW) (shown one-eighth mile north of elevation 6209) leads to a wide, wonderful slickrock-floored canyon lined with ponderosa pines and a string of large potholes. There is excellent camping in the area. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Digression: If the large potholes are not full and you are desperate for water, continue hiking down the slickrock-floored canyon until you are on a cliff above Deer Creek. Hike upcanyon along the rim for a quarter mile and cross a drainage that drops from the northeast. Descend a Class 3 slab to the creek.
The escarpment you have been following ends (north of elevation 6043). The valley containing Deer Creek is visible to the west and northwest, although you cannot see the creek itself. You should also recognize Durffey Mesa, which you hiked under on the first day. Simply continue north and find a way through low cliffs to Deer Creek. Cross the creek and follow the trail on the west side back to the trailhead. (2.0-2.5 hours.)
Steep Creek and Hot CanyonHike #31
Season:
Spring or fall.
Time:
9.0 to 12.0 hours. Two days.
Water:
Water availability is a problem on this hike. Steep Creek has large springs in several sections. Hot Canyon is dry.