There is good camping at its mouth, and medium springs a short distance upcanyon dispense clean water. (4.56.5 hours.)
Stay on the left side of the river. A poor path quickly turns into a horse trail that leads to the mouth of East Moody Canyon. There is good camping at its mouth, and medium springs are a quarter mile upcanyon. (1.0 hour.)
A short distance below East Moody Canyon is a large abandoned meander on the left (E) that is interesting to walk around. The walls of the canyon increase dramatically in height and the canyon narrows considerably. The mud like Chinle becomes more prevalent the farther downcanyon you go. (Map Twenty-two.) Scorpion Gulch comes in on the right (SW). It contains large springs. At its mouth is a triangular, pinnacle-like tower. Campsites are available a short distance down the Escalante River or a mile up Scorpion Gulch. (5.0-8.0 hours.)
Up Scorpion Gulch
An established path through the Wingate-walled narrows near the mouth of the canyon eases the way through the thick vegetation and unavoidable stands of poison ivy. Pass a rockfall on the left (Class 4-). This signals the end of the running water for a mile. The Wingate walls peter out and the canyon widens as it enters the Kayenta. At a hard right turn a short stretch of large spring-fed pool line the floor of the canyon. (These pools are usually dry in the summer.) If you camp in the area, please stay in the sandy wash below the pools. Do not camp next to the pools. Before heading upcanyon, it is best to fill up with water. There is no reliable water along the route back to the trailhead.
A couple of minutes above the pools a short side canyon comes in on the right (N) (shown to the southwest of elevation 5048T).
Digression: The short side canyon, though difficult to negotiate (Class 3 + ), leads to a fantastic view of the high Navajo dome country on the east side of Escalante Canyon, and provides egress from Scorpion Gulch. This is a highly recommended diversion. (1.0-2.0 hours round-trip.)
The canyon again divides. Go left (W) toward a huge overhang. A long string of large south-facing caves were used by Anasazi Indians.
Rock climber's note: A couple of breaks in the Navajo that contain rows of Moqui steps can be used to exit the canyon.
A good trail leads through a stretch of deep ravines and thick underbrush. Water may be available but is often hard to get to. By