simply follow Wingate and Kayenta benches high above the river into each canyon. The canyoneer then goes up each canyon as far as necessary to head it or cross it and return to the rim of Escalante Canyon.
There are exits from each canyon up to Stevens Bench (AN). (Stevens Bench is not named on the maps. It is located between the heads of the four canyons described below and Stevens Canyon. Some locals call this Stevens Plateau.) With careful study, one can put together a variety of routes that take you from one canyon, over Stevens Bench, and into another canyon. If you do go up on Stevens Bench, water availability is a problem. There are medium potholes near the rim of Ichabod Canyon. Other than those, water may not be available on Stevens Bench.
There are three routes to the Escalante River from the four canyons. Choose the route that best fits your needs.
To Shofar Canyon
(King Mesa map.) From the Swan Neck Bend follow the rim of the escarpment downcanyon into a Wingate-lined side canyon (shown to the east of elevation 4795). Note the small twin arches on the far (E) rim of the canyon. Cross the canyon. It has medium potholes and there is good camping in the area.
Digression: The first exit to the Escalante River is located here. Hike to the arches. The descent route to the Escalante River is fifty yards southeast of the arches over a small rise. It consists of a short chimney dotted with Moqui steps (Class 5.0, 30'). A steep slope leads to the river.
Again, follow the rim of the Escalante escarpment. There is one place along the cliffs that, from a distance, looks mighty narrow. Once at it, though, you will find that looks can be deceiving. The first major canyon encountered is Shofar Canyon (AN). Shofar is Hebrew for horn, which accurately describes many of the canyon's pinnacles, especially one in particular that looks like a horn. (Shofar Canyon is not named on the map. It is shown to the east of elevation 4964 and contains two major forks. Some locals call this Sheep Canyon.)
Digression: Great Old Broads for Wilderness Arch (AN) in Shofar Canyon is located in a small drainage a quarter mile northeast of elevation 4995T on the Stevens Canyon North map.
The exit out of Shofar Canyon to Stevens Bench is via a steep slope to the left (N) of a large tower (shown one-quarter mile southwest of elevation 5375T on the Stevens Canyon North map).
Cross the west fork of Shofar Canyon a quarter mile south of el-