rescue party or helicopter to reach you. Backcountry Escalante is not the place to test your mettle. The time spent setting up belays or handlines is trivial compared to the time and effort it takes to mount an evacuation.
Be aware of ball-bearing rock. This rock is found in Navajo Sandstone and consists of round, loose, marble-sized concretions that cover some sections of rock. Locally these are called Moqui marbles. They are as slippery as banana peels underfoot.
Watch out for those friable little sandstone ledges that can easily break underfoot.
If you are not comfortable climbing a steep pitch with your pack on, pull it up or lower it down on a rope.
When searching for routes up or down the cliffs, remember the canyoneering maxim that states "if it is green, it will go." This simply means that if you see an unbroken stretch of shrubbery going up a cliff, in all likelihood, you'll be able to make your way along the greenery. Be forewarned, however, that this is not 100 percent reliable.
Another axiom in canyoneering is that it is often nearly impossible to find a route down a cliff from its top. This is especially true with the higher walls. Make sure you can see the entire route down a cliff face before attempting it, even if it means skirting along the escarpment for some distance to get a good view. Binoculars work well here. There is nothing worse than getting most of the way down a wall, then finding that progress has been thwarted by a drop you could not quite see from above.
Most accidents do not occur on the steep routes. People are very careful and conservative when the challenge is the greatest. It is usually when the going is easy and you are not paying attention that accidents occur. A large percentage of accidents take place toward the end of the day when hikers are tired. Many accidents occur around camp or while taking the nighttime constitutional.
Wading can be a trial. Carry a walking sticksuitable poles can be found everywhere along the riverand probe for deep pools. Every group needs its sacrificial lamb while wading. The first person should not carry a camera. Wrapping gear in large plastic trash bags is recommended for those hiking along the river.
Be aware of punji sticks along the Escalante River. These are the short sharp ends of willow and tamarisk left by beavers. They are omnipresent and harmful if you fall on one.
AlwaysALWAYScarry enough water to get back to a known source. In this guide, a known source is defined as a water source that you were just at. Another known source is a perennial stream such as the Escalante River, Deer Creek, lower Death Hollow, or lower Coyote Gulch.