Your goal is to make your way east across the two canyonsand several smaller washesand end up on the Navajo rim of Choprock Canyon. (Choprock Canyon is not named on the map. It is shown between elevations 5293T and 5103T.) None of the canyons is difficult to cross. A medium spring and a cattle trough are onequarter mile south of elevation 5681T. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
Into Choprock Canyon
Follow the west rim of Choprock Canyon south. Stay on top of the Kayenta. An old cattle trail helps in places. Near a Navajo dome (elevation 5293T) the Kayenta ledge narrows and drops through several short cliff bands. From a distance the drops do not look promising, but with perseverance you will find a way through them. Hike along the top of the Wingate. Two hundred yards before reaching the Escalante River locate a row of Moqui steps that descend a crease in the cliff to the canyon floor (Class 5.1, 50'). The steps are hard to see unless you are right at the edge of the canyon. Good camping and large springs are in the area. (2.0-3.0 hours.)
The Overland RouteChoprock Canyon to Twentyfive Mile Wash
To Neon Canyon
(Silver Falls Bench map.) From the Escalante River hike up Choprock Canyon for a couple of hundred yards. A constructed cattle trail cuts up the Wingate wall on the right (LUC)(E). A short barb-wire fence will help you locate the trail. Go up the trail, which leads southwest until you are above the Escalante River. Hike south along Kayenta and Wingate benches. (Egypt map.)
You will be following a trail. Follow the trail only for as long as it stays near the Wingate. Once the trail starts cutting uphill, leave it. Stay near the top of the Wingate or you could find yourself in the wrong place.
Digression: A couple of steep slabs can be used to descend to the river before you reach Fence Canyon. It is visible across the river to the west.
Turn the corner into Neon Canyon. (Neon Canyon is not named on the map. It is shown to the west of elevation 5270T.) Descend a cattle trail that goes down the first bowl into the canyon. There is good camping near the river. Do not camp up Neon Canyon. (1.5-2.0 hours.)