The Early Weed Bench road starts 23.6 miles down the Hole-in-the-Rock road at the "Early Weed Bench 6 mi." sign (shown as a Jeep Trail to the northwest of elevation 4865 on the Basin Canyon map). The road is suitable for high-clearance vehicles. There are few campsites along the road. (See Map Fifteen.)
0.0
At the Hole-in-the-Rock road. Go east-southeast.
0.2
"Y." Go left (N). After heavy rains the wash can be troublesome. You will now cross a corner of the Big Hollow Wash map.
1.0
(Egypt map.) You are in the Carmel Formation. The sandstone cliffs to the left (N) are Entrada Sandstone.
4.4
"Tee." Stay with the main road to the right (E).
4.8
Start of Twentyfive Mile Wash, the Escalante River, and Scorpion Gulch Hike #15. Early Weed Bench parking area and trail register. There is good camping another quarter mile along the road. The trailhead is one-eighth mile north of elevation 5453T. You are in the Carmel Formation.
5.1
Start of Spooky and Peek-a-boo GulchesThe Long Loop Hike #16. Cross the head of a Navajo-walled canyon that goes south. There is a parking area 0.1 miles farther along the road. You are one-quarter mile east of the Early Weed Bench trailhead and are in the Carmel Formation.
5.2
Large parking and camping area on the left.
5.3
Start Upper Brimstone GulchThe Slot Hike #17 and Scorpion Gulch and the Scorpion Horse Trail Hike #18. End of the road. There is good camping in the area. You are at the end of the road shown one-quarter mile southwest of elevation 5524T and are in the Carmel Formation.
Historical note: Early Weed Bench was named by ranchers who noticed that since the bench tips to the south it warms up quickly in the spring, allowing the plants to bloom earlier than in other areas. The name Scorpion refers to the benchlands lying between Twentyfive Mile Wash and Coyote Gulch. Scorpion is referred to simply as "Scorpion"; it is not succeeded by Flats or Bench. The name derivation is twofold. First, the area is ideal scorpion habitat. Second, from the end of the road, look east. In the background, with only its upper half visible, is Scorpion Point, a flat-topped slickrock mesa (elevation 5460 on the Scorpion Gulch map). On its right side is a small pointed dome; to its right is a small dark pinnacle, the tail of the scorpion.