shallow seas. Other layers are coarser deposits of sand and gravel brought in by rivers. Current ripples (ripple rock), mud cracks, and raindrop impressions can often be seen. Flowing water also deposits cross-bedded layers, but these are generally much thinner than the wind deposits described above. (Other differences are too technical for this discussion.)
Horizontal-bedded layers are also formed by fossil-bearing limestone from shallow seas and by gypsum evaporated in basins with restricted connection to the open ocean (which concentrates the salts because the water does not mix very rapidly with the ocean). Alternating layers of marine and stream deposits record the migration of the shoreline in response to changes in sea level brought about by local and global climate changes and tectonic motions.
Few formations enjoyed exactly the same environment the whole time they were being laid down. Occasional wind-blown dune deposits occur in river sediments, and massive dune deposits often contain limestone layers that were deposited in interdune lakes. Once deposited, clastic particles are liable to be swept away eventually unless they are retained in a basin or held by rising groundwater. As the sediments become more deeply buried, heat, pressure, and fluids harden them into rock by chemical and physical processes of solution, replacement, recrystallization, compaction, and cementation.
By 250 million years ago the highlands to the east-the Ancestral Rocky Mountains and the Ancestral Uncompahgre Uplift-had greatly eroded and were becoming less important as sources for the sediment. To the west an oceanic plate was forcing its way under the western edge of the North American Plate. These forces were induced by plate tectonics, the shifting of the huge geologic plates driven by the churning of the earth's hot, fluid mantle. This subduction, or one plate diving under another, caused the formation of a volcanic arc to the south and west of the Colorado Plateau. The arc gradually spread north. The new highlands formed in the arc contributed more and more sediment, both as stream sediments and as volcanic ash. (The Ancestral Rockies resulted from earlier plate collisions that produced the supercontinent of Pangaea.)
Sixty-five million years ago the subduction process under the western edge of North America speeded up. Instead of plunging steeply into the mantle, it is thought that the subducted oceanic crust slid shallowly under the continent all the way to the Great Plains. This Laramide Orogeny both compressed and uplifted the West. The compression, acting at old zones of weakness, buckled the sediments laid down over a 500-million-year period. In the Escalante region, the upheaval produced an upwarp running north and south through the Circle Cliffs. The upwarp is bor-