It was not until the late Pueblo I Period (A.D. 900) that substantial numbers of Kayenta Anasazi entered the Escalante region. Perhaps pressured by overpopulation, internal strife, or drought conditions, they left their traditional homelands to the east, crossed the Colorado River, and started exploring and exploiting the new environment. Over a period of many years they traveled up the main canyon of the Escalante and entered its tributary canyons on both sides of the river.
By the early Pueblo II Period (A.D. 1075) the Kayenta Anasazi had worked their way north to Boulder Valley, where they built the largest Kayenta village on the west side of the Colorado River. The village is now called the Coombs site and is located in the town of Boulder at Anasazi State Park.
Blessed with permanent water, an abundance of lumber for firewood and construction, arable land, and easy access to hunting on both the benches and in the canyons, Coombs village developed into a settlement that included more than eighty structures ranging from jacals and pithouses to numerous storage cists. The maximum population is thought to have been over 200 people. Visits by Fremont Indians, Anasazi from the Virgin River area to the southwest, and Anasazi from Mesa Verde and Chaco Canyon to the southeast have been documented.
Coombs village was abandoned after a fire devastated it about A.D. 1275. It is unclear whether the fire was the result of an accident, deliberate destruction by the Kayenta Anasazi before they vacated the village, or if it was started by hostile invaders. It is surmised that the Kayenta returned to their homelands near the San Juan River after vacating Coombs village. There is no evidence that any Kayenta Anasazi stayed in the Escalante area after abandonment of the village.
The highest Indian population in the Escalante area centered on the Kaiparowits Plateau. It was well suited for an agrarian people who depended on permanent water sources, tillable land, and a large quantity of wildlife. Peoples from two branches of the Kayenta Anasazi settled on the plateau: those coming from the San Juan River area worked their way up the tributary canyons of the Escalante to the Kaiparowits; and Virgin River Kayenta Indians, from what is now the Zion National Park area, came to the Kaiparowits from the southwest.
It is known that small groups from the Kaiparowits took periodic trips into the Escalante canyons, perhaps during the winter to escape the cold or during the spring and summer growing seasons. Routes were established between the Kaiparowits Plateau and most of the Escalante side canyons as well as into Llewellyn and Cottonwood gulches to the south.
By A.D. 1200 Anasazi flight from the Escalante region was un-