Equipment
As for backpacking, we all know the way it intensifies earthly gravity. Backpacking is awkward, ugly, monotonous, and lacks thrilling bodily sensations .... Devoid of glamour, it is pure access.

Bruce Berger, 1990
It is not within the scope of this guide to provide comprehensive details on backcountry equipment. Books like Colin Fletcher's The Complete Walker cover backpacking thoroughly and at length. But, after many years of canyon hiking and guiding, I have found that desert camping presents some different problems than mountain hiking. The suggestions below are all tried and true techniques and will help you outfit yourself properly.
Backpacks: The standard external frame backpack works well on the nontechnical routes, but for those venturing off trail, a good internal frame pack is essential. Such a pack will not throw you off balance on the climbing sections and does not have the metal bracing that always seems to catch when you are butt-scooting down sandstone slabs. Most of the high-quality internal frame packs also come with a built-in fanny pack which will do you well for those quick trips up a side canyon.
Tents: Either freestanding or tie-down type tents work well in the desert. High winds are common in the Escalante. Make sure your tent can withstand winds in excess of eighty miles an hour. Except for the occasional campsite on the canyon floor, most of your camping will be on slickrock or desert cobble. Tent pegs will not work in these situations. Tie six-foot lengths of parachute cord to all of the tent hold-down loopseven on freestanding tents. The cords can be tied to rocks that, if moved, should be returned to their previous positions before breaking camp.
Mountaineers often wax or silicone the tent's zippers to keep them from freezing. In the desert environment, these products catch the sand, which can lead to non-functioning or prematurely worn out zippers.
Stoves: Sand in the desert kills stoves. Experienced desert rats prefer either Svea or Optimus stoves. Though a tad heavy and clunky, they are simple, simmer well, and will not get clogged by blowing sand. Whatever type of stove you do carry, know how to fix it and bring a repair kit.