Fortymile Creek and Willow GulchHike #24
Season:
Spring, summer, or fall. Due to deep wading and a possible short swim, warm days are preferred.
Time:
7.5 to 9.5 hours. One long day or two pleasant days.
Water:
Water availability is not a problem on this hike. Both Fortymile Creek and Willow Gulch have perennial flows of water along their lower ends.
Elevation range:
3700' to 4260'.
Maps:
Sooner Bench and Davis Gulch.
Skill level:
Moderately easy route finding. Most of the hiking is Class 2, but there are several short Class 4 obstacles to overcome. There is a lot of wading and the potential for a short swim. This is a moderately strenuous hike. If you do this as an overnight hike, familiarity with low-impact camping techniques is essential.
Special equipment:
Wading shoes or boots. Dayhikers may be able to keep their gear dry, but overnight hikers need to bring an inner tube for floating packs. This route is moderately difficult.
Note:
There is one stretch of poison ivy in Fortymile Creek that is hard to avoid.
Land status:
This hike is in Glen Canyon National Recreation Area.
Fortymile Creek and Willow Gulch are like Bragi's story: they are always enchanting and never seem to end. Their opulent vales are intimate yet open; they contain hanging gardens, a waterfall, relics of prehistoric occupation, a huge arch, pools to play in, and side draws to explore. Although this route is a tad long on miles, it is worth the effort. Most do this hike in a day; the wise take two.
The route starts on the Hole-in-the-Rock road and goes down Sooner Wash, which quickly joins Fortymile Creek. It is followed to the mouth of Willow Gulch near Lake Powell. Willow Gulch and one of its slot-like tributaries lead back to the trailhead.
To Fortymile Creek
(Sooner Bench map and Map Thirty-two.) From the Sooner Wash sign, hike east down Sooner Wash. Just as you enter the light colored Navajo Sandstone, there is a thirty-foot drop into a narrow gorge. Pass it by hiking along the left rim of the gorge to a slot that contains several large chockstones. Drop into the slot, clamber un-