Wilderness
Best of all, the Escalante country belongs to us. It lies entirely within the public domain, and is therefore the property not of land and cattle companies, not of oil and mining corporations, not of the Utah State Highway Department or any Utah Chamber of Commerce, but of all Americans. It's our country. Or should be. It's supposed to be.

Edward Abbey, 1971
The Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument's vast and austere landscape embraces a spectacular array of scientific and historic resources. This high, rugged, and remote region, where bold plateaus and multihued cliffs run for distances that defy human perspective, was the last place in the continental United States to be mapped. Even today, this unspoiled natural area remains a frontier
Bill Clinton, September 18, 1996
I started with a simple map of Escalante country, white paper crossed with a squiggle of black lines. Small print followed the contour of those lines and provided each with a name: Harris Wash, Stevens Canyon, Choprock Bench, Death Hollow, Llewellyn Gulch, and a hundred others. Every label was familiar to me, intimately so. I had spent nearly thirty years learning what all of themeach representing a canyon, ridge top, bench, peak, stream, or slothad to offer. Mile after mile, season after season I had trudged through that country, learning, discovering, exploring, and loving. So many adventures, so much beauty, so many friends.
But now my task was serious as I took out a black pen and started to draw on the map. With a hardened hand I began blacking out the areas on the map that over the years had been proposed for alteration or developmentthat is, destruction. Canyons, benches, and ridges disappeared under the ink. Soon my simple map of a complex landscape showed only small areas of white. The rest of the map was black.
The black represented not only a piece of wilderness we could have lost forever, but potentially a piece of myself. Without those areas what would I, or you, have missed? I thought of the struggle my friend Rob and I had in the Long Branch of Sleepy Hollowsixteen hours of danger and delight: the green room, the natural bridges, the swims, the rappels, our bloody hands and knees, and how we had hugged each other when it was over. Or the winter night on Pollywog Bench when incredible winds tried to sweep Harvey, Bud, and me into oblivion. Or the week Ginger and I nickled-and-dimed our way down The Gulch on an archaeological survey, all the while catching up on the months we had been aparttalking, laughing, and giggling. Or the warm spring evening on top of King Bench