Follow the wash north-northeast below the dunes. After rounding a corner, the largest sandstone peak in the area will be visible to the northeast. To its left is a mesa with a prominent cave in its middle. Follow various washes and small canyons and pass the prominent cave mesa on its left (W) side. On the way to it you will cross a long stretch of what I call ''staccato" rock. Unique and dramatic.
To the trailhead
From the left side of the prominent cave mesa look north. You will see a pointed white dome (elevation 6150) on the far side of a small mesa. Pass the small mesa on its left (S) side. You will intersect an abandoned road that is now occasionally used by off-road vehicles. Follow it to the left (NW) until it ends. Now make your way northwest over a small rise. The trailhead should be visible. Descend a cliff band (several options) back to the start. (If you should get mixed up during any portion of the exit route, simply head north. You will intersect the Old Sheffield road.) (2.5-3.5 hours.)
The Escalante River and the Sand SlidesHike #9
Season:
Spring, summer, or fall.
Time:
Part 110.0 to 14.5 hours. Two to three days. 

Part 212.0 to 16.5 hours. Two to three days.
Elevation range:
Part 15000' to 5720'. 

Part 24800' to 5720'.
Water:
Water availability is a problem on these hikes. The Escalante River has a perennial flow of water. The cross-country route back to the trailhead has no water.
Maps:
Part 1Red Breaks and King Bench. 

Part 2Add Silver Falls Bench.
Skill level:
Part 1Moderately difficult route finding. There is one long cross-country section. Class 3 + scrambling. If the Class 5.0 climb up the "ladders" is planned, the leader must be experienced with belay techniques and be capable of leading the "ladders" pitch without protection. There is a lot of exposure. Lots of wading. This is a moderate hike. Knowledge of low-impact camping techniques is essential.
Part 2Moderately difficult route finding. There is one long cross-country stretch. Class 3 + scrambling. Lots of wading. This is a moderate hike. Knowledge of low-impact camping techniques is essential.