IV

The Burr TrailThe Eastern Escalante
The eastern Escalante is bounded by Highway 12 to the west, the Circle Cliffs to the north, the Waterpocket Fold to the east, and the Escalante River to the south. The Circle Cliffs, an immense circle-shaped escarpment of Wingate Sandstone that surrounds a huge basin, defines the area. Unlike the western Escalante, which is dominated by Navajo Sandstone, the east side of the river contains a panoply of geologic formations that give the Circle Cliffs Basin and the canyons that flow through it a distinctive character.
Almon Thompson of the second Powell expedition was the first white man known to have entered the Circle Cliffs Basin, which he named. Geologist Grove Karl Gilbert, unaware of Thompson's designation, called the cliffs both the Howell Fold and the Escalante Fold during an expedition in 1875.
The first wagon road into Circle Cliffs Basin was scouted and built by Charles Hall in the early 1880s as a replacement for the difficult Hole-in-the-Rock route. The Hall route went from the town of Escalante down Harris Wash, up Silver Falls Creek, across the Circle Cliffs Basin to Muley Twist Canyon, and down Halls Creek to the Colorado River.
The Burr Trail, which cuts through the heart of the Circle Cliffs Basin, was built in the late 1880s by John Atlantic Burr. Burr's unusual middle name was in honor of his birth while his parents were crossing the Atlantic Ocean in the early 1870s. He built the Burr Trail to move cattle from the Aquarius Plateau to Bullfrog Basin on the Colorado River. Burr died alone on the desert while trying to remedy a urinary tract blockage with a piece of wire.
In 1920 the Ohio Drilling Company built the first automobile road into the Circle Cliffs Basin. This road went down Harris Wash and up Silver Falls Creek to the Wagon Box Mesa area.
Local ranchers built a rough road through the upper gulch to the northern Circle Cliffs Basin in 1936 to install watering troughs at Brinkerhoff Seeps.
Turning the Burr Trail into a road started in earnest in 1947. By 1950 a good road had been built through Long Canyon, and in 1951 the switchbacks down the face of the Waterpocket Fold had been completed. Uranium miners, arriving in large numbers in the