of miles above Harris Wash and Silver Falls Creek and was not designated as wilderness.
Glen Canyon National Recreation Area, which is run by the National Park Service, provides superficial protection to most of the canyons of the lower Escalante. Unfortunately, development, mining, and grazing are allowed in GCNRA. This will be of concern in the future.
The Federal Lands Policy Management Act (FLPMA pronounced ''flipma") of 1976 was similar to the Wilderness Act, but it applied to areas under the control of the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). The Federal Lands Policy Management Act required the BLM to inventory its holdings to see which lands were suitable for wilderness designation. The BLM was to use the definition of wilderness provided in the Wilderness Act. Once the BLM had determined which lands met the criterion for wilderness, Congress then would decide their final disposition.
The BLM lands in the Escalante region include most of the main Escalante Canyon and its side drainages from the town of Escalante to Harris Wash and from the Circle Cliffs to the Kaiparowits Plateau. After inventorying its land, the BLM determined that 167,358 acres had wilderness qualities. These acres became Wilderness Study Areas (WSAs).
The BLM wilderness inventory process came under attack from environmental groups who felt that the BLM did not use the congressional definition of wilderness. They believed that the BLM had declared areas worthy or not worthy of wilderness designation based on the agency's various whims and fancies. The environmentalists noted that most of the lands excluded from wilderness consideration by the BLM had the potential for economic developmentwhether it be for mines, dam sites, or stock improvements.
For example, in the Escalante region the BLM left out much of the Circle Cliffs Basin and the Studhorse Peak area based on possible oil, gas, and uranium exploitation. Much of the Aquarius Plateau was left out due to its potential for carbon dioxide mining and timber harvesting.
Environmental groups decided that Congress needed an accurate description of the wildlands in southern Utah to counter the inaccurate information presented by the BLM. In 1985 they formed the Utah Wilderness Coalition (UWC), an association that now includes over a hundred conservation groups such as the Sierra Club, the Wilderness Society, the National Parks and Conservation Association, and the Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance.
Members of the UWC did an intensive survey of the Escalante area and found that close to another 100,000 acres met the congres-