of slickrock before intersecting the Bowington road, which is followed back to the trailhead.
Part 1: To the Escalante River
(You immediately leave the Tenmile Flat map and go onto the Calf Creek map. Map Six.) From milepost 68 walk northwest for 100 yards and enter a shallow dirt-lined wash. Follow its course downward. (Big Flat Wash is not named on the map. It runs generally north between "Big" and "Flat.") Within twenty minutes the wash enters Navajo Sandstone and slowly deepens into a modest canyon. After passing several small pour-offs, the drainage abruptly plummets into a deep gorge. A squat ten-foot tower is to the right (LDC). (Map Four.) The upper walls of Escalante Canyon are visible downcanyon.
Scramble up to a wide ledge on the right (LDC)(E) side of the gorge and follow it downcanyon for a couple of hundred yards until you see a ten-foot-tall pinnacle on top of the slickrock to the right (E). Clamber up to the pinnacle. Now look northeast up a wide, shallow slickrock drainage and locate a short, squat balancing rock on the skyline. From the balancing rock walk several yards to the edge of Escalante Canyon. Look east. A quarter mile away is a steep boulder-filled gully leading down to the river. Traverse along a ledge to the top of the gully.
Follow a cairned path down the left side of the gully. Partway down, the path crosses the gully, then descends to the river. Several short obstacles prove easy to overcome (Class 3-). (1.5-2.5 hours.)
Down the Escalante River
Walk and wade downriver, cutting meanders as necessary. Your goal is to exit the canyon via the Bowington road, which starts at the mouth of a small side canyon on the right in about 1.5 hours. (The small side canyon is shown one-quarter mile east of elevation 5769. Do not confuse it with a larger drainage that is a couple of hundred yards to the east.) Unfortunately, landmarks are limited, so do keep track of your progress on the map.
A quarter mile before reaching the mouth of Sand Creek look for the Bowington road cutting diagonally up a hillside on the left (LDC) (N). (It is easier to see the Bowington road coming down the north wall of the canyon than it is to see it going up the south wall. If you miss the road, you will meet the mouth of Sand Creek. Backtrack for ten minutes.) From the base of the road walk south to the river. (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Digression: Escalante Natural Bridge is a short stroll downcanyon on the right (S). It is worth a visit. (1.0-1.5 hours round-trip.)