The Hole-In-The-Rock Expedition
Monday, Oct. 20th, 1879. Spent most of the day in loading my wagons, and in the evening sold my house and lot to Geo. Lovell for a span of mules and harness and $100. 00 in money. Tuesday, Oct. 21st, 1879. Started in the afternoon for [the] San Juan ....
From the journal of Platte D. Lyman
Although many are familiar with the epic Hole-in-the-Rock expedition, it is important to describe it in a historical context. According to Mormon belief, the story starts in ancient times on the American continent with the prophet and historian Mormon, who, some time after the resurrection of Christ, inscribed the history of his people along with the words of many ancient prophets and Jesus Christ onto golden plates. The plates were passed to Mormon's son Moroni, who added to them and then hid them in a hill in what is now upstate New York.
It was on this hillside, on September 1, 1823, that Moroni came as an angelic being to Joseph Smith and showed him the golden plates, later giving him the power to translate them. This was the start of the Mormon religion. Smith was able to gather followers for his new religion but, because of some of the Mormon claims and beliefs, there was a strong anti-Mormon backlash. The Mormons found themselves castigated by their neighbors.
This started a twenty-five-year search by the followers of Joseph Smith for a home free from persecution. Their first stop was in Kirtland, Ohio. After several years they moved to Far West, Missouri, a town that, according to Mormon doctrine, was their Zion. Doctrine or not, the Mormons soon were forced out by unsympathetic townspeople.
The next move was to Nauvoo, a town founded by the Mormons in Illinois. It was near there that Joseph Smith was killed in 1844 after offending locals by ordering a local opposition printing press destroyed. Now under the leadership of Brigham Young, the Mormons moved to Council Bluffs, Iowa.
Council Bluffs, and Winter Quarters, Nebraska, near present day Omaha, were to be used as staging areas for the last segment of the Mormon pilgrimagecrossing the Great American Desert to Utah's Great Salt Lake. This portion of the odysseyfrom Council Bluffs to the Great Salt Laketook two years, from 1846 through 1847. It involved 14,000 people as well as wagons, horses, cattle, and miscellaneous livestock.
Salt Lake was not Zion, but it did have several distinct advantages over the other towns the Mormons had lived in. The area be-