Down Egypt 3
(Egypt map and Map Eighteen.) Drop south off the road to the floor of the wash. Saunter downcanyon. Pass a large pour-off at the top of the Navajo on the left (E) and find a route down steep slickrock into the canyon below. If you have problems getting into the canyon, this route is not for you.
Long stretches of tight narrows with high vertical walls are interspersed with open areas where the walls lay back at a reasonable angle. At these junctures it is possible to exit the canyon. There are many small obstacles to overcome, though none are difficult (Class 5.0) or have much exposure. In a couple of places a handline or belay will reassure the less experienced. The amount of wading depends on the season and how soon after rains you descend the canyon.
The exit
Near the end of the canyon the slot opens for a stretch before plunging into the final slot, which contains several small natural bridges near its top. Do not continue farther down the canyon. The obstacles below are overwhelming. (3.0-4.0 hours.)
Digression: Twentyfive Mile Wash is now a quarter mile away and can be most easily reached by following the canyon's right (LDC) rim.
Rock climber's note: The final section of slot, below the bridges, can be descended. A full-length climbing rope tied to one of the natural bridges provides an anchor for a thirty-five-foot rappel. Retrieve the rope on the way back. Short obstacles and deep wading or swimming through an intimidating stretch of narrows leads to the end of the canyon at Twentyfive Mile Wash.
Back to the trailhead
From the natural bridge scramble east up slickrock for 100 yards to the crest of a ridge. Another deep slot will be visible a quarter mile to the east. Follow the ridge north-northeast between the two slots (over elevations 5004T, 5201T, and 528 T). The ridge dies in a maze of domes, towers, and striking slickrock. Wend your way north-northeast back to the Egypt road (many options). (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Lower Harris WashHike #13
Season:
Part 1Any.
Part 2Spring, summer, or fall.