5121T). Drainages are on either side of you. At a low Navajo prow, stay to the right (E) and walk near the Kayenta/Navajo interface. Drop into the upper part of the now shallow drainage that is to the right (E). There are medium potholes here.
Follow the drainage up. It divides at a small red slickrock sheet. Go right (NE). The drainage fizzles out. Hike northeast over a rise. A ridge of Navajo domes that goes north to south is on the right (SE) and a Kayenta-walled canyon is to the left (NE). (You will pass the left (W) side of elevation 5449T.) The terrain forces you east between the ridge and the canyon. (The canyon is shown to the south of elevation 540 T). Drop to a Kayenta ledge that goes along the right side of the canyon. The ledge will drop you to the floor of the canyon near its head. There are medium potholes and good camping in the area. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
Across the benchlands
Exit the canyon on its left (LUC) side. Hike north-northeast. At the top of a rise you will see a Siamese-twin dome of white Navajo Sandstone (elevation 5822T) to the north. The dome on the left is the larger of the two and there is a small tree in the saddle between them. To the right of the Siamese dome is a beehive-shaped Navajo dome (elevation 5885T). Pass the beehive-shaped dome on its right (E) side and gain the rim of East Moody Canyon. Follow Navajo ledges northeast between the canyon on the left and Navajo domes on the right. Do not descend to the Kayenta.
(Map Forty-eight.) Eventually you will be forced onto the top of a ridge that divides East Moody Canyon on the left from the north fork of Georges Camp Canyon on the right. (Georges Camp Canyon is not labeled on the map. It is shown to the south of elevation 6027AT on the Stevens Canyon North map.) This canyon will be readily recognized for its vast area of smooth Wingate slickrock that creases into an impenetrable inner gorge.
Follow the ridge as it parallels East Moody Canyon and takes you over the head of a couple of small canyons that drop south into Georges Camp Canyon. One of these has a squat, white, twenty-foot-tall Navajo pinnacle on a prow. You can clearly see Wingate sandstone a short distance down from the rim. This canyon contains medium and large potholes. The largest and deepest of these may require the use of a pot on a rope to obtain water. (This drainage is one-quarter mile east of elevation 6027AT.) (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Continue along the rim of East Moody Canyon (passing over or near elevations 6163T and 632 iT). As you near its head, a large expanse of slickrock and a 100-foot pinnacle in one of its several arms becomes visible (located one-eighth mile north of elevation 643 T). Your goal is to make your way to the base of the pinnacle.