6.4
The canyon narrows as it enters Wingate Sandstone.
9.0
Wire gate. This is often closed.
10.2
A line shack is barely visible to the left. Although the track continues for another mile, it is best to leave your vehicle here. Hikers doing the Little Death Hollow-Wolverine Creek loop and other hikes in the area will appreciate not seeing or hearing vehicles along their route. Please be courteous. It takes less than a half hour of walking to reach the mouth of Wolverine Creek.
End of side track
5.6
The white vertical cliffs on both sides of the road are in the Shinarump Member of the Chinle Formation.
6.1
Cattle guard.
9.3
The road starts crossing the shallow upper end of Wolverine Creek. Water in the wash may be a seasonal problem.
10.7
"Tee" Stay with the main road to the left (E). Short signed Wolverine trailhead road to the right (SW). There is a trail register. This road provides access to the main fork of Wolverine Creek.
10.4
The white slickrock area to the left that looks like a freshly baked pan of biscuits is in the Shinarump Member of the Chinle Formation.
11.8
"Tee." Stay with the main road to the left (SE). The short road to the right (SSW) goes to the signed Wolverine Petrified Wood Natural Area and provides access to the south fork of Wolverine Creek.
12.6
Start of Little Death Hollow and Wolverine Creek Hike #33. "Tee." Short signed Little Death Hollow trailhead track to the right (S). There is adequate parking and camping near a corral. You are a quarter mile southeast of elevation 5712T and are in the Chinle Formation.
13.1
"Tee." Stay with the main road to the right (E). The track to the left (N) goes to the Studhorse Peak area.
14.4
Cattle guard. Pioneer Mesa is to the left (NE).
16.9
The North Fork of Silver Falls Creek is on the right (S).
19.4
(Wagon Box Mesa map.) "Tee." Signed Wolverine Loop road theEastern Entrance (the Moody road). The Burr Trail is to the left (N). To visit Silver Falls Creek and the Moody canyons, go right (S). You are at mile 8.0 on the Wolverine Loop roadthe Eastern Entrance Road Section.