9.9
Start of Fence Canyon, the Escalante River, and Twentyfive Mile Wash Hike #14. At the Egypt trailhead and trail register. There is plenty of camping in the area. The parking circle is located onequarter mile southwest of elevation 5257T. You are on a thin layer of Carmel Formation limestone. To the north-northeast are the three peaks of the Henry Mountains. They are, from left to right: Mt. Ellen (11,506'), Mt. Pennell (11,132'), and Mt. Hillers (10,737').
Historical note: The bench to the east was named Egypt for its imagined similarity to the deserts of North Africa.
Egypt 3The SlotHike #12
Season:
Any. Recent rains will make this hike a difficult undertaking.
Time:
4.5 to 6.0 hours. Add more time if your group is large.
Water:
There may be no water along this route. Bring your own drinking water.
Elevation range:
4800' to 5600'.
Map:
Egypt.
Skill level:
Moderate route finding. Class 5.0 climbing. The leader must be experienced with belay techniques and be capable of leading the climb ing sections without protection. There may be some wading. This hike is suitable only for the athletic. The slot you descend is so narrow that overweight hikers cannot squeeze through it. This slot is not appropriate for claustrophobes, novice slot canyoneers, youngsters, or youth groups.
Special equipment:
Wading boots and a forty-foot rope are needed. Use the smallest daypack you can; a large pack will be difficult to maneuver through the narrowest sections.
Land status:
This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
Thirteenth-century Italian poet Dante Alighieri wrote "lasciate ogni speranza, voi ch'entrate" (abandon all hope, ye who enter). Dante was, of course, referring to the underworld. I hope that you will not abandon all hope as you descend Egypt 3, one of the tightest and longest slots in the area.
The route starts high on Egypt and descends a seemingly endless slot that ends near Twentyfive Mile Wash. A cross-country route over a marvelous slickrock ridge climaxes the trip.