adequate. An old pair of lug-soled hiking boots is preferred. Sandals and neoprene booties do not provide enough support or protection.
Terminology: Each route description starts with a brief summary of the hike. Within the body of the text are several things to note. Digressions describe short side trips or note points of interest. Alternate routes are short variations that will take you to the same place as the standard route. They are used to describe ways around deep water or to avoid difficult climbing sections. Rock-climber's notes describe short, difficult side trips or variations that will be of interest to rock climbers. The Historical notes try to bring a sense of history to the hikes.
The Overland Route, presented at the end of the guide, describes a one-way route that parallels the course of the Escalante River but stays above the rim of the canyon. It starts on Highway 12 and ends at the Fortymile Ridge trailhead near Coyote Gulch. Along the way, the route takes you in and out of side canyons and along the benches in between. You can join the Overland Route at many places and can use it to design your own hikes.
LDC means Looking Downcanyon. LUC means Looking Upcanyon. Heading a canyon means walking upcanyon along one rim until it is possible to cross the top of the canyon and walk in the opposite direction along the opposite rim. A dry camp is one that is not near water. A horse ladder consists of wide steps chiseled into the sandstone by ranchers. Moqui steps are hand-and toeholds that Indians pecked into steep rock walls. They are common in the Escalante. A cliff dune is a sand dune that drops down a cliff.
Jump starting a day is a technique used when a waterless section is ahead. There are variations on the theme, but the idea is to eat dinner near water, then hike for a couple of hours before dark and dry camp. This can substantially reduce the amount of water you need to carry and can help ensure that you will get to water the next day.
Names for features are as historically accurate as possible. Some features are not named on the maps or in the literature but have a local name. When used, these are prefaced by (LKA)Locally Known As. Features I have named are followed with an (AN)Author's Name. Some object to the naming of landmarks and canyons; however, I have found it is easier for hikers to call a canyon by name rather than describe it. Example: Calling a canyon the Long Branch of Sleepy Hollow is infinitely easier than saying that it is the first little side canyon to the north below the hiker's maze that is between Dry Fork Coyote and Hurricane Wash in Coyote Gulch.