elevation 4744). The canyon is sand-floored, pristine, and pretty. A medium pothole can be found near the end of the canyon on a bench below a hanging garden.
Grove Canyon (AN), twenty-five minutes down from Boxelder Canyon, and also on the left (N) (located to the east of elevation 4587), is difficult to locate because its mouth is obscured by a handsome grove of cottonwoods. A short distance up this side canyon, a slab on the right leads out of the canyon. Follow the rim upcanyon to a small drainage and a large pothole. At the end of the canyon, below a pour-off, is a medium pothole.
The hike down Dry Fork Coyote from Grove Canyon to Coyote Gulch is best described as a pretty chore. The vegetation which chokes the canyon and the seasonal ponds that form along its course can make for frustrating walking. See Hike #20 for details on continuing down Coyote Gulch. (King Mesa map.) (5.5 to 7.5 hours from the Dry Fork Coyote trailhead to Coyote Gulch.)
Peek-A-Boo and Spooky GulchesThe Standard LoopHike #19
Season:
Any. Recent rains can make this a tough hike.
Time:
2.5 to 4.5 hours.
Water:
There is no water along this route. Bring your own drinking water.
Elevation range:
4640' to 4960'.
Map:
Big Hollow Wash.
Skill level:
Easy route finding. Class 4 + climbing. The leader must be experienced with belay techniques and be capable of leading the climbing sections without protection. Exceptionally rotund hikers cannot squeeze through Spooky Gulch.
Special equipment:
A forty-foot rope will reassure beginners and youngsters. Large day packs will not fit through the slots.
Note:
On busy weekends these slots are packed with people. Try to do them during the week or in the off-season.
Land status:
This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
This is the premier and most popular short slot loop on the Colorado Plateau. Claustrophobically tight narrows, a host of natural bridges, and sensuous curves of cross-stratified sandstone combine to provide a magnificent experience.
The route starts by entering Dry Fork Coyote. It then goes up