The exit route from Harris Wash is by way of a break in the canyon wall to the north a quarter mile before reaching the mouth of the third side canyon. (The side canyon is shown at elevation 4732T on the Silver Falls Bench map. Map Seventeen.) Most will find it easiest to locate the mouth of the third side canyon, then backtrack to the exit.
Scramble up moderate slickrock to a wide ledge under the final cliff band. Walk upcanyon (NW) along the ledge until you are near its end. Ascend a right-curving crack on a moderate slab to the top of the cliff (Class 5.0, 25', belay as necessary). A log leaning against the wall can help on the hardest part, which is the first eight feet.
Alternate route: An easier but much more exposed route is available. From the top ledge, walk downcanyon a hundred yards, drop about fifty feet, then cut diagonally across a steep slab (Class 3-). Although easier, this route is not suitable for inexperienced slickrock hikers.
This is the last reasonably easy exit from the canyon. (1.0-2.0 hours.)
Back to the trailhead
Make your way north up to the rim of Harris Wash, then follow the rim west. Although you may think you have seen Harris Wash in its entirety while hiking along its floor, most will be amazed at what you have missed. Rows of Moqui steps, perhaps a cliff dwelling or two, and delightful views of the sinuous curves of the canyon make the rim walk enchanting. You can stay within a couple of hundred yards of the rim. (Red Breaks map.) After reaching the Carmel Formation either find a way into Harris Wash or follow a cattle trail that deposits you in the canyon near the start. (4.0-5.0 hours.)
Part 2: To the Escalante River
(Silver Falls Bench map.) From the mouth of the third side canyon continue down Harris Wash. The walls rise and the canyon narrows. Good campsites appear near the confluence with the Escalante River. (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Up the Escalante River
Hike up the Escalante River. Pass the mouth of Silver Falls Creek. It is the large canyon that comes in on the right (LUC)(NE) in fifteen minutes. The walls along the left (LUC) side of the river are vertical for a couple of miles until a huge sand dune to the left (SW) breaks the symmetry. This is the Lower Sand Slide, which was part of a historic wagon route. You will not miss it. (The dune is one-quarter mile south of elevation 5162AT.) Battle your way up