son's designation, called the plateau Boulder Mountain for its many lava boulders.
Clarence Dutton, on a geological survey of the area in 1877, described the area: "The Aquarius should be described in blank verse and illustrated upon canvas. The explorer who sits upon the brink of its parapet looking off into the southern and eastern haze, who skirts its lava-cap or clambers up and down its vast ravines, who builds his camp-fire by the borders of its snow-fed lakes or stretches himself beneath its giant pines and spruces, forgets that he is a geologist and feels himself a poet."
Lower Pine Creek and the upper Escalante River provided fertile soil for the farms and ranches of the first Mormon settlers of the area in 1875. By 1879 the small valley that now contains the town of Boulder was being used as summer cattle range, and in 1887 the valley gained its first permanent inhabitant.
Initial access to Boulder from Escalante was along the Old Boulder road which paralleled the general route of present-day Highway 12. (See the "Highway 12 Area" chapter for details.)
The Boulder Mail Trail started as an Indian route from Escalante Valley to the Salt Gulch area and was initially called the Death Hollow Trail by stockmen. Ten miles shorter than the Old Boulder road, the BMT was improved by Mormon ranchers and was in constant use by the 1890s. Starting in 1902 the BMT was utilized during snow-free periods to carry mail between the towns of Escalante and Boulder. This lasted until 1935 when the Hells Backbone road was finished. (The BMT is described in Hike #3.)
The Bowington road was built in 1909 and provided access from Escalante to the Salt Creek area and to Boulder. Its course follows a horse trail first established by John Bowington (also spelled Boyington or Boynton). The road was abandoned after a couple of years when several sections washed out. (The Bowington road is described in Hikes #1 and 4.)
In 1933 the "upper road," now called the Hells Backbone road, was built by the Civilian Conservation Corps. Winding for nearly forty miles through what was then called Powell National Forest, the Hells Backbone road was the first automobile road to connect Boulder and Escalante; but it was not open in winter. The construction workers called the section of the road that crosses the head of Death Hollow the "Poison Road," declaring ''one drop sure death." It was not until Highway 12 was completed in 1940 that the towns were permanently linked with a year-round automobile road.
Hells Backbone Road Section
Access to Hikes #1 through 3. 

Access is from Highway 12.