Harry Aleson and Georgie White

The First to Run the Escalante
Why are whitemen always discovering things and places that natives have known for ages? Just allow time enough, and there may come a day in the distant future when a whiteman reports the discovery of the Pyramids in a barren land once thought to have the name of:
EGIPTH.

Harry Aleson, 1959
It was an inauspicious beginning for the great river runners Harry Aleson and Georgie White. According to Aleson's notes, May 24, 1948, started normally. Harry and Georgie spent the morning visiting friends and buying groceries in Escalante. Their intent was to be the first to run the Escalante River. They would start at the Highway 12 bridge and paddle to the then still free-flowing Colorado River.
By mid-afternoon on that hot spring day they had provisioned their crafta surplus seven-man U.S. Navy raftand had set it in the river. But high water was not with them. Harry wrote: ''We left directlyfor Lees Ferry (?) Almost 40 feet after we started in a narrow, shallow poolwe were aground. So, out into the river (?), and pullover the rocks,and sandbars,riffles,on and off every few minutes until near dark. Whenever we could, we would sit on the opposite ends of the boatand guide by foot. Believe we got about 4 miles in 4 hours."
Harry Aleson was born in 1899 in Waterville, Iowa, where he spent his formative years. In 1918 he enlisted in the U.S. Army Signal Corps and spent the World War I years in France. A plane he was in crashed, and his injuries, although not exceptionally debilitating, entitled him to a full pension.
After returning from France, Aleson finished high school and several years of college, then migrated to the Southwest while working as a geophysicist in the oil fields. In 1939 he was introduced to canyon country while on a boat trip on Lake Mead. That trip was the start of a thirty-year love affair with the Colorado River and its side canyons. Until his death in 1972, Aleson devoted most of his time to guiding river trips on the Colorado River and exploring this remarkable province on foot.
Harrv Aleson was interested in all aspects of the canyons he visited. His extensive correspondence, now housed at the Utah State Historical Society library in Salt Lake City, provides an intimate view of those early explorations. Correspondence flew back and forth between Aleson and his peers, letters that often noted details on the discovery of a new canyon, arch, or bridge, a historical tidbit, or even a new row of Moqui steps or an Indian ruin. His friends in-