Skill level:
Difficult route finding. Class 5.4 climbing with little exposure. The leader must be experienced with belay techniques and be capable of leading the climbing sections without protection. Lots of wading and swimming. This route is suitable only for experienced canyoneers who are in excellent physical condition. Low-impact camping skills are essential. This route is not recommended for novice canyoneers, youngsters, or youth groups.
Special equipment:
Wading boots, one inner tube for every two or three people, large garbage bags or river-type dry bags, and special dry bags for camera equipment and valuables. A forty-foot climbing rope is adequate.
Note:
This route has been designed for hardcore canyoneers who are in excellent condition. The return route is long, arduous, and has little water. Most will not want to do Death Hollow as a loop hike. Options include exiting at the Boulder Mail Trail (Hike #3) or, once at the mouth of Death Hollow, going up the Escalante River to the town of Escalante or downriver to the Highway 12 bridge.
Death Hollow contains extensive patches of poison ivy that cannot be avoided. Be prepared.
Land status:
This route is in Box-Death Hollow Wilderness Area and Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
Death Hollow, one of the most spectacular canyons in southern Utah, should be on every hardcore canyoneer's tic list. The operative words here are death and hardcore; this canyon is difficult throughout and many epics have unfolded in its deepest recesses. Luckily, no deaths have occurred; but it is just a matter of time. Death Hollow is not a canyon for the newcomer who may not appreciate what it offers. It is a canyon one aspires to, a reward for building skills and gaining experience over many seasons.
Death Hollow is a canyon of grand proportions. At its upper end huge white walls enclose a wide, forested valley. In the middle the walls taper into a relentless slot that proves challenging to traverse. The canyon ends with a serenity that fathoms the depths of beauty.
The route starts on the Hells Backbone road at the very top of Death Hollow Canyon high on Boulder Mountain and descends the canyon to the Escalante River. The river is followed downcanyon for a short distance to the Bowington road (a trail), which winds its way up the ridge that divides Death Hollow and Sand Creek. After crossing Slickrock Saddle Bench and the Boulder Mail Trail (BMT), the route leaves the Bowington road and follows a cross-country route back to the trailhead.