derway. Drought, internal conflict, lack of arable land, stream entrenchment, flash floods, a lack of wood, and outside aggressors have all been cited as the reason for abandonment. It is known that outlying groups started leaving first, working their way back to their ancestral lands on the east side of the Colorado River. The last Kayenta Anasazi to abandon the area were from Coombs village.
The use and exploitation of Escalante lands by both Kayenta and Fremont Indians was extensive. There is virtually no side canyon, slot, draw, bench, or high point that does not show evidence of use. Sometimes it is a lithic scatter where the Indians sat fashioning stone implements while scouting the benches for game. In other places one can find rows of Moqui steps leading to large potholes in the deepest defiles. (Moqui steps are hand-and toeholds Indians pecked into steep rock walls.) Pictograph and petroglyph panels are almost ubiquitous along the river, in the side canyons, and near the summits of the highest points in the area.
Contact between the Anasazi and Fremont was extensive and peaceful. Although they ranged the same region, they assumed different ecological niches: the Anasazi were primarily farmers who preferred the Kaiparowits Plateau and the canyons of the Escalante, while the Fremont, although also farmers, were primarily hunters who most often remained on the upland areas near Escalante Valley and below the Kaiparowits Plateau.
The Indian presence in the Escalante area does not end with the Fremont and Anasazi. By A.D. 1300 Numic-speaking Indians from the southwestern Great Basin had entered the general area. These Ute, Piute, and Shoshoni Indians were not farmers; they were hunters and gatherers who roamed far and wide without establishing permanent settlements. Archaeologists have identified some of their temporary camps in the canyons near Boulder Valley, on the north edge of the Aquarius Plateau, and along the northeast side of the Kaiparowits Plateau.
It was not until Mormon settlers arrived in Escalante Valley in the last half of the nineteenth century that first-hand knowledge of the local Indians became written down. Almon Thompson of the Powell survey of 1872 wrote of encountering a small tribe of Indians in Escalante Valley. Early pioneers told stories of meeting Piute Indians hunting on the Aquarius Plateau and in Boulder Valley. A small group that local Mormons called Escalante Indians lived in the valley, raising goats, farming, trapping, and weaving. In 1918 the few Escalante Indians left were moved to a settlement at Greenwich on the northwest side of the Aquarius Plateau.
Before the Mormon settlers arrived in the Escalante area, Athabascan-speaking Navajo Indians living on the east side of the Colorado River had developed trails into the canyons of the Es-