Special equipment:
Part 1Wading boots. If you plan to do the "ladders" route, a sixty-foot climbing rope is essential.

Part 2Wading boots. No rope is needed.
Land status:
Part 1This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.

Part 2This hike is in the monument and in Glen Canyon National Recreation Area.
Often the dream of a Homeric "Lotus-land" appears to me while in the backcountry and fights to overwhelm my native instinct to return to the real world. Should I ever eat from the lotus tree and disappear into a world of idleness, this is the area where you'll find me. Interesting route finding, easy wading along the Escalante, a surfeit of historic sites, and an abundance of distractions can keep you occupied for a long time.
The route comes in two parts. Part 1 starts on Big Spencer Flats near the Old Sheffield road and descends an unnamed canyon to the Escalante River. The river is followed down to the mouth of The Gulch. A cross-country route leads back to the trailhead.
Part 2 continues down the Escalante River until you are between Horse Canyon and Harris Wash. You then exit Escalante Canyon by way of either the Upper or Lower Sand Slide. Crosscountry routes take you back to the start.
Part 1: To the Escalante River
(Red Breaks map and Map Thirteen.) From the drill pipe, hike north-northeast down a sandy track across Big Spencer Flats. At the north end of the flats the track goes up to a break in a low Navajo ridge, then turns left (W), and ends in 100 yards. Leave the track before it endsat the cornerand go northeast through the break into a shallow bowl that contains a tiny drainage (shown to the north-northwest of elevation 5770). Follow the drainage downcanyon as it slowly enlarges and deepens. Obstacles are minor until you reach a high fall where the reddish Navajo gives way to yellow sandstone below. (King Bench map.)
It will take some effort and scouting to get around both this fall and a couple more below it. The wash suddenly narrows into a slot lined with potholes. Immediately beyond these is an impassable fall. Backtrack 100 yards to the start of the slot and exit the canyon to the right (LUC)(N) via either of two steep gullies. The upcanyon gully is the easiest.
At the top of the gully you can see the Escalante River. A deer trail that starts 100 yards uphill to the left leads down a cliff to the river. (1.5-2.5 hours.)