Trips to Yosemite and the Sierra, the redwoods of northern California, and the Pacific coast followed in quick succession. While in San Francisco, Everett hobnobbed with artist Maynard Dixon and photographers Dorothea Lange and Ansel Adams.
In April 1934 Everett's older brother Waldo dropped him off in Kayenta. For several months Everett wandered Arizona, spending much time with the Navajo Indians. July found him near Navajo Mountain, where he packed into Rainbow Bridge and then back to Arizona to participate in an archaeological dig.
That fall Everett visited Bryce Canyon, where he spent a couple of days before hiking over the Escalante Mountains to Escalante. He had heard of the beauty of the area from locals. Everett wrote a letter to Waldo from Escalante, telling him: "I stopped a few days in a little Mormon town [Escalante] and indulged myself in family life, church-going, and dances."
Apparently planning to spend the winter in the Escalante, Everett continued: "As to when I shall visit civilization, it will not be soon, I think. I have not tired of the wilderness; rather I enjoy its beauty and the vagrant life I lead, more keenly all the time. I prefer the saddle to the streetcar and star-sprinkled sky to a roof, the obscure and difficult trail, leading into the unknown, to any paved highway, and the deep peace of the wild to the discontent bred by cities." No more letters were sent by Everett.
On November 11, 1934, the twenty-year-old Everett left Escalante for the canyons of the lower desert. After not hearing from Everett for three months, his parents alerted the residents of Escalante. A search was launched in March 1935. Several canyons were checked before Everett's burros were located near the foot of the cattle trail leading out of Davis Gulch. Since his camp gear, food, and painting supplies were not with the burros, the searchers speculated that Everett left them and struck out on foot to explore the surrounding country. Bootprints matching Everett's were found throughout Davis Gulch, at the top of the Hole-in-the-Rock, and near the foot of the Kaiparowits Plateau. The search continued for several months before it was called off
Three theories concerning Everett Ruess's disappearance have surfaced over the years. First, Everett may have fallen off a cliff, certainly a good possibility in the rugged Escalante country. Second, some residents of Escalante speculated that Everett crossed the Colorado River and disappeared in Navajo country. Everett had spent considerable time with the Navajos and felt a bond with them.
The theory that in retrospect seems the most plausible is that Everett was killed by cattle rustlers and his body and camp kit buried to hide the evidence. Rustlers were known to have been in the area and ranchers had had problems with them in the past.