hung from ropes while working with picks or drilling holes for dynamite.
Lower down, one section of the road was constructed by cantilevering it out over a steep ramp with oak supports placed in drilled holes. This was named Uncle Ben's Dugway after its engineer, Benjamin Perkins. Other sections were widened and most of the ramp was smoothed with fill.
At the end of January 1879 the wagons were lowered through the Hole-in-the-Rock. Though much subsequently has been made of getting the wagons down, most were at the Colorado River by the end of the first day. After cross-locking the wheels with chains to keep them from turning, ropes from the rear axle were run around a juniper post embedded in the ground. The men then belayed the wagons down the initial chute.
Nathaniel Z. Decker described the descent: " . . . putting mother and us five children out, he [Decker's father] seated himself on the front wagon and started. Down they went in a flash and landed in the soft ground at the end of the slick rock slide . . . but one big mule was dragged and seriously hurt. How mother and the rest of the kiddies got down without harm; I suppose they were too scared to get hurt. I could scarcely keep my feet under me it was so steep and slick . . . "
Once they were across the river the hardships were hardly over. Road workers had already blasted a 250-foot-high ramp from the river up a sheer cliff to Cottonwood Canyon. A short, easy traverse up Cottonwood Canyon ended at Cottonwood Hill where difficult country slowed the expedition. The Little-Hole-in-the-Wall, another steep slope almost as severe as the original Hole, went out of Cottonwood Canyon to Little Mesa.
After crossing Little Mesa, the trail builders forced a passage to the top of Grey Mesa. Another dugway was built down its north side, and easy terrain led to Lake Pagahrit, which was formed by a natural dam in Lake Canyon.
Clay Hills Pass was the next problem. A three-mile-long trail was excavated down the thousand-foot-tall mud cliff, causing a week-long delay. Comb Ridge, a steep sandstone cliff near the San Juan River, was the last major problem. A road was blasted up the precipice, which is now called San Juan Hill. After planning for a six-week trek, the expedition finally arrived in Bluff six months later, in April 1880; however, no lives were lost and three babies were born.
Contrary to popular belief, the expedition was not cut off from help. Money to support the expedition was raised throughout Mormon country. Great interest was shown by outsiders and newspapers reported on progress. Food and dynamite were brought in from Es-