Part 1: Down Fox Canyon
(Egypt map, Map Nineteen, and Map Twenty.) From the trail register walk northwest along the road to the "Tee" mentioned at mile 4.4 in the Egypt Bench Road Section. Turn right (N) and hike to the edge of the escarpment. A slickrock bowl below you marks the top of a canyon dropping to the northeast. Descend a steep Navajo slab into the bowl. A small inner gorge develops. Stay along its left side until you are on a prow overlooking the vertical walls of Fox Canyon (LKA). (Fox Canyon is not named on the map. It is located to the northeast of elevation 5053T.) A path on a bench below a steep slab (Class 3) is visible to the east-northeast. Follow the path into Fox Canyon and down it to Twentyfive Mile Wash. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
To the Escalante River
You have intersected Twentyfive Mile Wash a short distance below the Glen Canyon National Recreation Area boundary. Good campsites along the stream abound. You may encounter short stretches of wading. A host of side canyons are interesting to explore. They are detailed in Hike #14. Although camping is nonexistent at the mouth of Twentyfive Mile Wash, there is fine camping a short distance down the Escalante River. (3.5-5.0 hours.)
To the Overland Route: Warning! This route is technically difficult and has lots of exposure. Experienced rock climbers only. To intersect the section of the Overland Route that runs between Twentyfive Mile Wash and Scorpion Gulch, hike down the Escalante River from the mouth of Twentyfive Mile Wash for a couple of hundred yards, then cross the river. Skirt along the base of the cliff to a break in the wall. The first ten feet are the hardest (Class 5.5, 10'), but climbing a cottonwood tree can ease the difficulty. The steep gully above has Moqui steps. Pass a crack near the top by using an exposed set of Moqui steps to the left (Class 5.2, 60'). Hike across a wide terrace and climb a sloping ramp (Class 4+) that has Moqui steps near its top to the rim.
To the exit route
Head down the river for several minutes. The exit route out of the canyon goes up the first sand dune encountered on the right (W). (The dune is located one-eighth mile northwest of elevation 4538T.) There is no water on Scorpion. Load up before leaving the river.
At the top of the dune work southwest along the Kayenta ledges that parallel Twentyfive Mile Wash until a side canyon to your right (W) forces you south. Make your way to a high point at the top of the canyon. Follow a compass course west-southwest across Scorpion. Make sure to stay far enough south to avoid the drainages that