II

The Highway 12 Area
Utah Highway 12 starts in the town of Torrey and ends near the town of Panguitch to the southwest. The portion of the highway covered in this guide is from Escalante to Boulder. Highway 12 effectively cuts the Escalante region into two distinct areas: the mountain canyons that start on the Aquarius Plateau and the canyons of the lower desert region.
The Highway 12 area is a land of expansive views and endless slickrock. Travel and automotive magazines have rightfully called it one of the most scenic drives in America. For the backpacker and explorer, the highway provides easy all-weather access to the backcountry. The routes that start from the highway should be considered first when the weather is lousy and the dirt roads have turned to gumbo.
Indians of the late Basketmaker II Period (about A.D. 500) were the first to settle in the Highway 12 area. They left evidence of their occupancy in the form of pictograph panels high on the walls of lower Calf Creek Canyon.
Anasazi and Fremont Indians proliferated during the Pueblo II and III periods (A.D. 900 to 1300). The high benches now crossed by the highway supported an abundance of deer and bighorn sheep. Indians spent extended periods on vantage points chipping arrowheads and other stone tools; lithic scatters are found everywhere.
Cattlemen from towns to the north of Boulder were the first to use Boulder Valley, in 1879. The first permanent inhabitant settled there in 1887. It was about that time that Escalante ranchers started to graze their animals in Boulder Valley.
The first road between the towns of Boulder and Escalante was the Old Boulder road. It started as a rough trail that was slowly improved over a period of years to the point that wagons and, later, automobiles could use it. Starting from Escalante, the Old Boulder road crossed Big Flat and dropped to the Escalante River just below the mouth of Calf Creek. The road then went downriver for several hundred yards, exited the canyon, and followed a tortuous path up the cliffs to Haymaker Bench. After crossing the bench, the Hogback, and New Home Bench, the trail descended into Boulder.
The difficulties the pioneers had in traveling this road were