shack soon becomes visible on the right bank. The canyon is remarkably uniform in structure, making it hard to tell exactly where you are on the map. In 1.5 hours you will reach a barb-wire fence. This marks the start of Wingate Sandstone, which is characterized by vertical cliffs pocked with holes. Water stops running here and will not return for an hour or more. (You are near "Steep" on the map.) (1.5-2.0 hours.)
The next landmark is a hard left corner an hour upcanyon from the barb-wire fence (shown one-half mile to the east-southeast of elevation 6738). (Map Forty-two.) The ambience of the canyon changes. Flowing water soon reappears and the bush bashing ends. Large lava rocks are strewn along the stream and the channel is lined with ponderosa pines. Signs of cattle decrease. This area is idyllic. The canyon narrows considerably and there may be some minor wading until you reach a small fall and a deep pool in a narrow gap. You can either tackle this directly (deep wading) or backtrack for 150 yards, clamber up a very steep boulder-choked gully to the right (LUC)(NE), and pass the fall.
Also pass the second pool on the right (LUC). The third pool must be tackled head on (knee-to waist-deep wading). The Wingate canyon narrows even more and there is some minor climbing and wading. This section is unbelievably beautiful, with red Wingate walls framed by a variety of greenery. As the canyon enters the Kayenta, the wading ends. After passing a couple of small waterfalls you will find an excellent camp spot along the only wide section of the canyon.
Above the camping area note where the stream has cut under a long, but not high, overhang on the left. This is the only overhang of its type in the area and it is obvious. A minute past this the canyon divides. The main canyon is on the left (NW). The canyon on the right (NE) has a small arch on its left side and a stepped slickrock drop at its mouth. (You are one-eighth mile south-southwest of elevation 7044.) There may not be water along the route. Load up here. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
To Hot Canyon
Exit Steep Creek by scrambling west up a steep hillside and through short cliffs to the top of a sharp ridge covered with lava boulders. This is tough. Look west. Below you is a deep drainage. Behind it is a long ridge with a tree-covered top (elevation 7900). On its left (S) side is a lower bump with trees on its top and white Navajo Sandstone visible on its left side (elevation 7584). Your goal is to get to the rim of Hot Canyon, which is immediately below the middle of the hill that is at elevation 7584.
You will cross the heads of two drainages on the way. The first