rock Saddle Bench to the Slickrock Saddle. (Escalante map.) Most of this section is uphill through pinyon and juniper. The Slickrock Saddle itself is easy to recognize. You drop off the Carmel and are again surrounded by Navajo. Just before you reach the saddle, note where the pioneer trail builders cut a ramp down a small cliff. Sand Creek is visible to the east, Death Hollow to the west.
From Slickrock Saddle the trail traverses northwest near the rim of Death Hollow on slickrock for about fifteen minutes. One hundred yards after the trail leaves the slickrock and drops onto the sand the Bowington road joins the BMT. You are now fifty yards east of the rim of Death Hollow. (3.5-4.5 hours.)
Go right (NW) on the BMT toward Sand Creek. In ten minutes the trail divides. The BMT goes to the right (NNE); the Bowington road goes to the left (NNW). At this juncture a small Navajo tower (elevation 6617) is visible a short distance to the east. This junction is difficult to see.
Follow the Bowington road. After fifteen minutes it takes you across a wide shallow slickrock drainage that has two arms. After the trail crosses another short pinyon-and-juniper area, it follows the right (E) side of a small drainage and descends to Sand Creek. (You are now at the ''S" in Sand.) Sand Creek has a perennial flow of water and there is excellent camping under ponderosa pines. (1.0 hour.)
To the Hells Backbone road
The final push to the Hells Backbone road is very long and has a lot of elevation gain. A jump start, if your schedule allows, is recommended. There will be no water until you reach the Hells Backbone road. Load up at Sand Creek.
Exit Sand Creek to the left (LUC)(W) and make your way to the top of the ridge that divides Sand Creek and Death Hollow. There are many options. (Roger Peak map.)
Your goal is to follow the ridge north. After crossing elevation 7933 the ridge narrows in three places. The Right Fork of Death Hollow is on your left (W); Sand Creek is on your right (E). After passing the third narrow area (just north of elevation 8073), it is easiest to stay below the right side of the ridge at the 8,300-foot level until you reach the Hells Backbone road (at mile 25.5). You can now cache your pack and walk the road back to the trailhead. (6.5-9.5 hours.)
Sand CreekHike #2
Season:
If you plan to do this as a complete loop hike the recommended seasons are late spring or early summerafter spring runoffor early