Up the Bowington road
Cross the river and start to enter a short canyon to the south. Cottonwoods and several large Russian-olive trees block its mouth. The Bowington road starts on the right (W) just as you enter the canyon.
Historical note: Several names are etched on the canyon walls near the road. 0. (Orlow) H. Griffin was the son of Charles E. Griffin, who moved to Escalante in 1879. Orlow scratched his name on the rock on March 15, 1911. Other names along the trail include Emerson Porter (Oct. 3, 1922) and Mazle Alvey.
Short constructed sections and cairns along the slickrock make route finding easy as the trail cuts up the Navajo escarpment. After traversing a short sandy hill, a large area of rolling slickrock is encountered. A few cairns lead southwest across the slickrock. Near the top of the cliffs the trail turns into an often used off-road vehicle track. Follow this track as it crosses nondescript benchlands before winding its way back into Big Flat Wash. It is followed back to the trailhead. (If you lose the trail, simply hike southwest and intersect Big Flat Wash.) (2.0-3.0 hours.)
Part 2: To the Bowington road
(Calf Creek map.) Start at the bottom of the steep gully where you first encounter the Escalante River. Cross the river once, then hike downstream for 100 yards. Exit the canyon through a break in the Navajo to the left (N). (If you go too far downriver, around the first corner, the canyon walls rise and there is no possible exit.) You will find yourself in a sand-floored drainage lined with ponderosa pines. At its upper end is a long black streak that descends the sloping white Navajo slickrock into a pond. (The drainage is shown to the south-southeast of elevation 6084. The mouth of the drainage is immediately east of a marked 5400' elevation line.)
Follow the drainage delineated by the black streak (N). Pass a couple of pour-offs on either side (Class 3). The drainage flattens a bit, goes over a short rise, flattens again, and ends in a sandy area below a gentle slickrock hill. A fifteen-foot pinnacle is plainly visible near the top of a hill to the west.
Walk northeast for three minutes and intersect a small, northwest-running, ponderosa-lined canyon (shown to the east of elevation 6084). Many of the trees are dead. Follow the left (LUC)(SW) side of the canyon. In a couple of minutes the canyon divides: the main canyon veers right (NNE); the short left arm is to the northwest. (Up to this point you have been following the same exit route described in Hike # 1.)
Cross the canyon and enter the drainage on the right (NNE).