In another couple of minutes the North Fork of Phipps Wash comes in on the left (N). Again, note a cowboy glyph on the right from John Justet (April 15, 1899). (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Phipps Arch is a bit tricky to locate. Pay attention to the following details. Ten minutes downcanyon, the first side canyon enters on the right (E).
Digression: The side canyon, lined with boxelder trees, ends in an impressive alcove. (0.5 hours round-trip.)
Continue downcanyon for five minutes. The second side canyon, which contains a large alcove, comes in on the right (E). Phipps Wash narrows and a riparian habitat develops. Cottonwoods, boxelders, Russian-olive trees, coyote willows, rabbitbrush, and virgin's bower vines choke the canyon, but a good path makes the hiking easy. The canyon deepens as it cuts through the Navajo into the slope-and ledge-forming Kayenta Formation. Springs and fine campsites appear now and again.
Thirty minutes from the second side canyon, the third side canyon enters on the right (SE). This marks the start of the trail to Phipps Arch. (Calf Creek map.) (1.0 hour.)
For those doing Part 2, the hike up to the arch is a digression. Leave your backpack at the base of the trail. Those doing Part 1 will not return to Phipps Wash.
To Phipps Arch
The trail starts on a slickrock hill on the downcanyon (N) side of the mouth of the side canyon. Follow a heavily cairned trail northeast up steep slickrock (Class 3) to the arch. (The arch is shown on the map.) (0.5 hours.)
Historical note: The arch was named for Washington Phipps, a rancher who was killed by John F. Bowington in November 1878. Phipps and Bowington ran a herd of horses in Escalante Canyon. Locals report that the two men were good friends for a time, but something came between them. They split their camp: Bowington lived on the upper Escalante River; Phipps stayed on the lower Escalante near Phipps Wash. One day, Phipps, in a belligerent mood, approached Bowington and threatened him with a club. After warning him to stop, Bowington shot and killed Phipps. Bowington turned himself in to the local sheriff and was later acquitted.
Back to the trailhead
Walk through the arch, then go north for 200 yards to a short steep slickrock gully that drops from the wall on the right. Scramble up the gully (Class 3 +) to a small saddle. Climb southeast up a steep slab (Class 4 +, 40', belay), cross the top of a dome, and scramble