To Harris Wash
(Tenmile Flat map and Map Eleven.) From the trailhead go south-southeast, passing the flat-topped dome mentioned in the road section (elevation 5844) on its right (W) side. Enter a shallow wash and follow it downcanyon. In fifteen minutes you reach a fall. Pass it on its left side via a steep slab (Class 4, lots of exposure) or go up and around to the left and descend a gully.
The farther downcanyon you go, the better it gets. Textures and colors are the attraction. Short narrows in the Navajo are interspersed with sandy areas. The occasional drops are all easy to bypass. Colors become kaleidoscopic before the canyon withers into an endless Navajo corridor that empties into Harris Wash. A hanging fence marks the junction. (Map Twelve.) (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Down Harris Wash
Hike down Harris Wash. Although this section is not particularly interesting, it is fun to contemplate wagonloads of Mormon pioneers and caravans of supply-laden mules going down the wash on their way to Halls Crossing.
The walls slowly rise and are dominated by Navajo Sandstone topped with thin layers of Page Sandstone and Carmel Formation limestones. Thirty-five minutes from the mouth of Big Horn Canyon a wide side canyon enters on the right (W). This is Cottonwood Wash. Now keep an eye to the right (SW). The first time you clearly see some of the Kaiparowits Plateau through a break in the canyon wall marks the start of the exit route. This is twenty minutes below the mouth of Cottonwood Wash and is 150 yards before the wide mouth of Halfway Hollow, which enters on the right (W). (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Geological note: This is the perfect viewpoint for figuring out Page Sandstone. Look west at the cliffs. On top you can see a thin brown layer of limestone (the Judd Hollow Member of the Carmel Formation). About forty feet below the limestone is a light-colored horizontal band. Above the band is the Harris Wash Tongue of Page Sandstone; below the band is Navajo Sandstone.
Out of Harris Wash
The exit canyon (shown one-quarter mile west of elevation 5579) starts as a wide sandy wash to the left (N). Within a quarter mile the wide wash enters a slot.
Digression: You cannot get all the way through this short slot, but it is worth going up as far as possible if there is not too much water. Photographers favor this exceptional and unique slot.