quarter mile northeast of elevation 4769T) and drop to the rim of Ichabod Canyon (AN). It was named for Washington Irving's Ichabod Crane, who was chased by the headless horseman in the ''Legend of Sleepy Hollow." (Ichabod Canyon is not named on the map. It is shown to the east of elevation 4769T. Some locals also call this Sheep Canyon.) (2.0-3.0 hours.)
Digression: The exit from Ichabod Canyon to Stevens Bench is a steep slab (Class 5.0, 50') near the Navajo rim of the canyon that is one-quarter mile east-southeast of elevation 5163T. This is the hardest and least recommended of the exit routes. It will take much scouting to locate.
Across Ichabod Canyon
The third route to the Escalante River is by way of the floor of Ichabod Canyon. The route used to enter the canyon is tricky. It is located a quarter mile upcanyon from the confluence of the two forks of the canyon (Class 5.8, 40'). A rappel from a tree can be used. Large potholes and good camping are found in the canyon.
Alternate route: If this entrance is too difficult, head Ichabod Canyon and hike down to its east fork (shown one-half mile south of elevation 5876T). Most of the side drainages have large potholes. Enter the inner gorge of the upper part of the east fork of Ichabod Canyon. Hike downcanyon and locate a route on the canyon's north side that descends a steep sloping ramp above a tenfoot drop (Class 5.0, 25'). Look for Moqui steps. (Add 4.0 hours.)
Digression: Although Beryl Canyon (AN), the canyon to the east of Ichabod Canyon, does not provide a way to the Escalante River, it is worth visiting. (Beryl Canyon is not named on the map. It is shown to the south of elevation 5173T.) The derivation of the name Beryl is twofold. First, Beryl is a mineral, one of whose varieties is aquamarine. Second, the lady Beryl of myth was a laughing, loving beauty full of innocence and sunshine. Both accurately describe this lavishly watered canyon lined with large colorful pools. This canyon is the shortest of the quartet.
Use the route detailed in the Alternate route above to exit Ichabod Canyon. Hike to the rim of the Escalante escarpment and follow it downcanyon to Beryl Canyon.
The exit out of Beryl Canyon to Stevens Bench is located a quarter mile south of elevation 4957T.
To the Escalante River
Simply hike down Ichabod Canyon to the Escalante River. The lower end of the canyon is choked with poison ivy that is hard to avoid. (1.0 hour.)