right, a cliff dune provides an alternate entrance to the canyon for those doing the rock climber's route. A side canyon enters from the left (SE) (shown to the west of elevation 4004T).
Historical note: Below the mouth of the side canyon, on a wall to the left (LDC), is an inscription that reads:
E Reus Hunters 

LCC 1935 

FB. RS. HC. AT. HS. 

June 6
The inscription refers to a search party sent out to hunt for Everett Ruess after he was reported missing.
The canyon closes down. Short stretches of wading may be necessary if you are going to Lake Powell for a swim. (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Back to the trailhead
Return to Fiftymile Junction. (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Rock climber's note: Instead of hiking back up the floor of the canyon, there is an enjoyable route that exits the canyon, runs its rim, and returns to the floor of the canyon near Fiftymile Junction. This route has Class 5.0 climbing and lots of exposure.
From the Ruess hunters' inscription, go downcanyon for a couple of hundred yards and exit the canyon via a very steep slab on the right (LDC)(SW) (a couple of options). Hike to the rim of the canyon and follow it upcanyon. You can either reenter the canyon by going down the cliff dune or continue until you are past the arch and then climb down the aforementioned Moqui steps (Class 5.0, 40').
Go left (S) up Fiftymile Creek. In seventeen minutes the canyon divides (one-quarter mile west-southwest of elevation 4112AT). The main fork goes to the left (SE). Go right (SW). In two minutes the canyon divides again; the main canyon is to the left. Go right (WSW). The canyon above narrows and contains a couple of small obstacles (Class 4+, 7'). One may also pass this section on the right.
Above the slot the canyon becomes very shallow and Cave Point will be visible to the west-southwest. (Sooner Bench map.) Exit the wash and make your way across a blackbrush-covered plain back to the trailhead below Cave Point. (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Sixty Point and Twilight CanyonHike #26
Season:
Spring until mid-May or fall after mid-September.
Time:
14.5 to 20.0 hours. Three to four days.