Most often, the group-size rule is broken by youth groups. In the past, it has been common to see groups as large as fifty camping in popular canyons such as Coyote Gulch, Harris Wash, and Willow Creek. The aggregate damage by large groups is usually extensive compared to that of smaller groups. Sanitation problems, multiple trails between groups, and excessive noise detract from the wilderness experience of others in the canyons. Leaders of large groups should contact the Interagency Office in Escalante and discuss their plans with the rangers there before heading into the backcountry.
Trash: The most obvious eyesore. Take out more than you bring in. Apple cores, orange peels, banana peels, and nut shells are garbage. Carry them out.
Bodily waste: Solid waste should be disposed of at least 300 feet from any water source or camp area. Avoid water courses. Dig a hole four to six inches deep near vegetation and with maximum exposure to sunlight. The microorganisms associated with the vegetation will speed the breakdown of the waste, as will the heat available from the sun. Do not dispose of waste or urinate in caves or under overhangs.
In the popular canyons it is no longer adequate to burn your toilet paper; you must carry it out. In areas of dense or dry vegetation do not burn your toilet paper; carry it out. Wildfires start quickly and are difficult to extinguish. Plastic bags make carrying out your toilet paper easy and odor free. Grand Canyon backpackers have been carrying out their toilet paper for years. The Interagency Office in Escalante dispenses plastic bags with sanitation instructions to all backcountry users.
The conventional wisdom was that you should not urinate on vegetation. It has been found, however, that there are no impacts from this and that urine is a good fertilizer. The only rule now is to urinate away from water sources.
Washing dishes: Have you ever wondered why some campsites are overrun with mice and others are not? Have you ever had to set up your tent to keep mice from running over your face in the night? Miceand other animalsare attracted to the food scraps campers did not carry out. We used to use gray water holes for dishwater and leftovers; this is no longer acceptable. Instead, pour wastewater through a strainer into a second container. The wastewater can then be broadcast over a wide area away from camp. The dregs from the strainer, and any other leftovers, must be carried out.
Bathing: Water in backcountry Escalante is scarce and should be treated as a treasured commodity. Pothole water should be used only