To the exit route
Continue down the river to the first side canyon that comes in on the right (W) (shown to the east of elevation 4404T on the Stevens Canyon South map) . Its narrow mouth can be a bit hard to see. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
This excellent narrow canyon contains the Bobway, an old constructed cattle trail. You will exit Escalante Canyon here. There may be no water along the route until you are in the Long Branch of Sleepy Hollow. Load up here. Hike up the Bobway. The inner gorge opens and the trail ends. Puff up a steep sand dune to the top of the canyon. (1.0 hour.)
To the Long Branch of Sleepy Hollow
Hike west across a slickrock plain to the foot of "Rock" (elevation 4961 on the King Mesa map) , which is the dominant dome in the area.
Digression: Rock, a huge rounded dome, is worth scrambling up. A spring to the southwest of Rock (shown on the map) is often dry, but if you follow the spring drainage upcanyon for a mile or more large potholes appear.
Continue hiking west along the north side of King Mesa until you see a pass through the mesa to the left. Hike to the pass (shown at elevation 5020). (If you try to hike along the south side of King Mesa to the pass you will encounter endless troubles.) (1.5-2.5 hours.)
You have now joined the Stevens Canyon and the Waterpocket Fold Hike #21. Follow the directions in that hike down the Long Branch of Sleepy Hollow into Coyote Gulch and back to the trailhead. (6.0-8.0 hours.)
Alternate route: From Fools Canyon you can simply continue wading down the Escalante River to Coyote Gulch and back up Crack-in-the-Wall. (5.0-7.5 hours.)
The Pollywog Bench AreaHike #23 
Between Stevens Canyon, the Waterpocket Fold to the east, and the Pollywog Bench area at the confluence of the Colorado and Escalante rivers to the southeast are a series of marvelous and rarely explored canyons. These include Rose (AN), Cow, Fence, Bowns, and Long canyons.
The description of these canyons is brief. Just enough information is presented to give you a general feel for the area and to keep