for cooking and drinking. Other backpackers may be depending on the water. Save your swimming and bathing for the creeks and rivers. Swim in potholes only if there is a substantial flow of water. If you need to lather up, use pots and canteens to carry water well away from the water source. Use only biodegradable soaps; they do not have the perfumes and additives that are damaging to the environment. Never swim until you have washed off your sun-tan lotion.
Indian artifacts and ruins: The relics left behind by Anasazi and Fremont Indians belong to all of us and are protected by law. Archaeological sites are being destroyed at an alarming rate by vandals, pot and artifact hunters, and the uninformed public. The Archeological Resources Protection Act of 1979 provides stiff penalties for those harming archaeological sites. If you witness vandalism to an archaeological site, notify the personnel at the Escalante Interagency Office in Escalante. (See the "Access" chapter for the address.) Information you provide that leads to a conviction may entitle you to a reward.
There are protocols you must follow when visiting Indian sites:
1. When visiting ruins, view them from a distance. Although a couple of people may not severely impact a site, the aggregate impact of many visitors over a period of years can destroy it. Stay on established paths, never enter a ruin, do not climb on the walls or roofs of a ruin, and do not touch the walls of a ruin.
2. Do not camp or build fires in or near ruins or Indian sites. This includes the caves that Indians used as temporary camps that do not contain obvious ruins. Sometimes it is difficult to determine if a cave has been used by Indians. Look first for large artifacts such as manos or metates or grinding surfaces on larger rocks or boulders. Rock art in or near a cave is ample evidence of Indian occupation. The presence of lithicsflakes of stone that are not native to the areasignify that ancient peoples once used the site. In the Escalante area these flakes are usually chert, jasper, or chalcedony.
3. It is illegal to remove any Indian artifact. These include pottery shards, lithics, arrowheads, pots, baskets, etc. Leave them where you find them.
4. Rock art should be viewed from a distance. Do not touch, brush, or use chalk to outline the figures.
In recent years federal agencies have come down hard on those who desecrate or loot Indian sites. A $3,000 fine was levied against a man caught vandalizing an Indian ruin near Escalante in 1990. In 1992 an individual caught destroying a petroglyph panel with a