During periods of hot weather get an early start, rest during the midday heat, and resume travel during the cool evening hours.
Carry a well-equipped first-aid kit and know how to use its contents. It is inexcusable not to have taken at least an Advanced First Aid and CPR course.
A scratched eye from a bush snapping back is one of the most common injuries seen along the river. Wear dark glasses or safety glasses.
Cellular phones used to summon emergency help can and have saved the lives of the injured in the backcountry. They usually do not work while in the canyons but do work from benches and other high points.
Those taking groups into the backcountry shoulder special responsibility. It is essential for leaders to scout the route before committing inexperienced and usually poorly equipped hikers to it. Water sources, sections of difficult terrain, times and distances, and campsites should be noted on the reconnaissance. There is nothing worse for a leader than to get to the middle of a hike and then find that skills are lacking. It is unconscionablecertainly negligentfor group leaders to be unfamiliar with the route.
Winds occasionally reach eighty miles an hour, especially in the lower Escalante canyon areas where three great riversthe Escalante, San Juan, and Coloradocome together. When rain, sleet, or snow is added to the wind, miserable camping is assured. Make sure you and your equipment are up to the task.
Perhaps the most important thing you should remember while in the backcountry is that you are in it for the fun. If things do not go as planned, do not fret; the canyons will be waiting for you next time around. When in doubt, bow out. Keep this adage in mind when you think you are getting in over your headwhether you are contemplating a steep rock pitch or are having doubts about water availability.
None of the routes described in this book is worth injury or worse. Think carefully about your actions and how they will affect others in your group. The litany in the canyons is that you should first be safe; second, protect the environment; and third, have fun.