encountered. Roads can change overnight. It is best to be wary. If in doubt, walk suspect sections of road first. Try not to drive any of the roads at night. A black cow on a black road on a black night cannot be seen. Roads that have washed out, sandy sections, and the occasional deer will all conspire against you. Play it safe.
The introductory paragraph informs you whether there is camping at or near the trailhead. This does not mean there is a campground; it simply means that there are short side roads, washes, or pullouts that can be used for camping. Do not make your own tracks to a campsite; there are plenty already. There may be restrictions in some areas; obey all signs. Car campers should not use campfires; stoves are preferred.
Next is the mileage list. It starts with a description of where the mileage starts. All mileage is cumulative. To some, the mileage lists may seem too detailed, but the extra landmarks are meant to reassure. When important side roads are reached, the mileage list for that road is included. At the trailhead, the number of the hike is printed in bold type. When compass readings are required, be aware that a compass may not point accurately while in a car.
There is a difference between a road and a track. A road, although dirt or gravel, is maintained by occasional grading. Tracks are not maintained and tend to be rougher than roads.
Shorter hikes, those that do not warrant their own heading, are described in the road sections. They are all worthwhile.
Historical details are added to the road sections and will tell you about the people and events that helped shape the Escalante area.
The road sections may seem complicated at first, though they are infinitely less confusing than being lost in a maze of roads. Signs have a habit of disappearing. Keep track of your mileage and follow the road sections assiduously as you drive along.
Route Descriptions
It is important to read the route descriptions carefully from beginning to end before you begin your trip. This will help you decide if the route is suitable for your group. The description of each hike is prefaced by a concise section that will tell you at a glance the pertinent parameters for that hike. These include:
Season: The recommended seasons noted for each hike are only suggestions. Weather extremes in canyon country are the norm. Be prepared to vary your itinerary as weather dictates. Below are some general guidelines.
Spring
February: Winter is starting to wind down by midmonth. Expect temperatures to vary from twenty to seventy degrees Fahrenheit.