level, certainly making them of questionable value to those who came later.
Canyoneers usually do not know who installed a bolt, if they were qualified to do so, or how long ago the bolt was set. Often you end up with the problem we now see in Neon Canyon. At one rappel six bolts have sprouted. None are usable. A large natural arch next to the bolts works great as an anchor.
The bolt issue may be resolved in the future if lands in southern Utah do become wilderness. A part of the Wilderness Act of 1964 describes wilderness as areas "without permanent improvements." How this statement is interpreted is up to the individual agency involved, whether it be the U.S. Forest Service, National Park Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, or the Bureau of Land Management. Depending on each agency's recommendation, placing bolts in many canyon areas may become illegal.
If bolts are outlawed, it will certainly not spell the end of canyoneering; but it will force canyoneers to improve their skills and develop new techniques and equipment. I contend that most of the time bolts are used because the canyoneer is not skilled enough or is too lazy to descend the canyon "clean." Now is the time to work on canyoneering skills that do not include permanently defacing the rock.
You should never leave evidence of an anchor, usually sling material, where a hiker or tourist can see it. In slot canyons this often means at the first and last drops. The slings in the middle of the canyon will only be seen by slot canyoneers and therefore are not generally considered visually intrusive. There is no good reason a slot canyoneer cannot retrieve the sling at the first drop.
Sling left at the last drop should not be visible to the casual hiker enjoying the view from the canyon floor. Photographers find them to be a disaster. Someone placed unneeded bolts on the outside wall of the last drop in the East Fork of Choprock Canyon. The bolts, and the sling dangling from them, distract from the natural beauty of the hanging gardens on the wall below.
Technical slot canyoneering is in its golden age. The boundaries of difficulty are being pushed as different types of slots are discovered and new techniques are developed. We must take the time now to think about how we descend technical slots and canyons. Without care, we may be limiting the future of technical slot canyoneering. The number of quality slot canyons seems limitless now, but with the number of participants in the sport increasing, it will only take a generation or two before the slots have all been done. Once those "sheer terror" canyons become lined with bolts, they will become of interest to the novice and unqualified. Before you know it, that difficult slot you enjoyed will become a trade route for youth groups.