where a group of friends and I sat marveling at the views and reveling in each other's company.
How many others, I wonder, have shared similar adventures and intimate contact with and within the lands called Escalante? Thousands certainly, perhaps even hundreds of thousands over the years. If the lands represented by my penned black boxes and rectangles and circles had been lost, where would we have gone to find what we were seeking?
Since its initial exploration in the late 1800s, the Escalante has been a special place not only for outdoor enthusiasts but also for a few greedy souls who were intent on plundering the land for personal profit. The schemes the promoters have suggested over the years, when added together, would have spelled the destruction of the Escalante. It has only been through the tireless efforts of conservationists and environmentalists that the Escalante has remained the wonderful area we now enjoy. Detailed below are several of the serious development proposals that surfaced over the years.
Coal mining, dams, and power plants
In the early 1970s two coal-fired, steam-electric power plants were proposed near the town of Escalante. Coal was to come from mines located in the Straight Cliffs Formation at the base of the Kaiparowits Plateau near the head of Alvey Wash (the headwaters of Harris Wash). Water to run the steam generators was to come from reservoirs built along the Escalante River. Four dam sites were suggested.
The first, an earthen dam, was to be built just below the town of Escalante on the river. The second, an alternative to the first dam, would have entailed erecting a 133-foot concrete dam below the mouth of Pine Creek on the Escalante River. Water from either of these dams was to be used for both irrigation and to supply a 430-megawatt power plant.
The third dam would have been built on the Escalante River below the mouth of Horse Canyon. This dam, forming what was to be called the King Bench Reservoir, would have backed water up the main canyon for twelve miles and up Horse Canyon for several miles.
A system of canals and aqueducts ten miles long was to be used to pump water to the fourth proposed dam in the headwaters of Twentyfive Mile Wash. Water from this reservoir and the King Bench Reservoir was to be used exclusively for a coal-fired 1,500-megawatt power plant.