To Death Hollow
The trail goes down Sand Creek, crosses it, and follows its right side for ten minutes. At a large burned-out log the trail exits the canyon on the right (W). (If you miss this turn you'll end up bush bashing beside the creek with no visible trail.) Halfway up the hill note the wire cable strung from poles and trees.
Historical note: This old telephone line was installed in 1911 by the Forest Service to connect ranger stations in Escalante and Boulder. The ranger in Boulder let townspeople tie in with their own lines. The first telephone operator was Leander Shurtz who had been blinded as a child. Shurtz was renowned for being able to recognize each person's voice and was the modern version of the town crier, keeping everyone posted on the latest news. The line was used until 1955 when a microwave system replaced it.
The telephone line is your companion for the rest of the trip. It follows the BMT closely except when going up or down cliff faces. While going across benches it is usually visible.
From the top of the hill the trail leads southwest across Slickrock Saddle Bench to the rim of Death Hollow. (Escalante map and Map Three.)
Warning: Fifty yards before reaching the rim of Death Hollow the trail divides. The Bowington road (a trail) goes to the left (SE). The BMT goes to the right (SSW). Make sure to stay on the BMT or you could find yourself in the wrong place with no water. This is a common mistake.
The 600-foot drop into Death Hollow starts as a cairned route down slickrock. As the angle of the rock increases, long stretches of constructed trail switchback to the canyon floor.
Historical note: Lenora LeFevre, in her book The Boulder Country and Its People, tells of an adventure rancher John King had while riding this section of the BMT into Death Hollow in 1905. She writes: "Storms of sleet and rain had frozen on the trail leaving it a glare of ice. On the edge of the precipice John decided to walk and lead his horse. On the way down the slick narrow canyon trail both feet slipped from under him and off he went over the edge, hanging for dear life to the bridle reins which fortunately were new and strong. Clinching the wall of the chasm with his legs John gradually pulled himself up and over the sandstone to the trail while his horse stood braced against the pull. John promptly mounted his saddle horse and rode on down the steep trail refusing to think of what might have happened."