the Escalante naturallyto follow a canyon stream or a canyon rim on foot, wondering what is around the next bend."
Happily, the part of the bill establishing Glen Canyon National Recreation Area did pass Congress but the Trans-Escalante Federal Parkway part of the proposal did not.
The Burr Trail, a road that runs from Boulder to Capitol Reef National Park and on to Bullfrog Basin on Lake Powell, has been a source of contention between Garfield County officials and environmentalists. The county fought long and hard to pave the road, citing increased tourist business from Bullfrog Basin as its main reason for wanting to improve the road.
Environmentalists argued that a paved road would bring an influx of visitors to the area and damage the equanimity which exists on the Escalante's north side. The Bureau of Land Management's environmental assessment of the proposed paving agreed; it stated that traffic would increase 1,273 percent and that much of the area would lose its value of solitude and remoteness. Garfield County, nevertheless, paved the road from Boulder to the Capitol Reef National Park border in 1993. To date, the National Park Service has been unwilling to pave the portion of the Burr Trail that passes through the national park, thus making the paved portion a "highway to nowhere"
It just does not end
In 1989 the Bureau of Land Management transferred approximately 4,000 acres of land in Harris Wash to the State of Utah. The state planned to either open the area to development or sell it to private owners. The land transfer was not legal, however; and, after three years in the courts, the state agreed to return the land to the Bureau of Land Management. Part of the settlement called for the state to withdraw its claim to a right-of-way down Harris Wash. If implemented, the plan would have meant a road down magnificent Harris Wash, one of the most heavily hiked canyons in the Escalante area.
In 1992 Utah Congressman Jim Hansen proposed a bill to designate the Escalante region as a National Conservation Area. Despite its environmentally friendly name, the bill actually would have given the land less protection than it now enjoys. Part of the bill would have provided funding to pave the Hole-in-the-Rock road.
In 1994 Utah Governor Mike Leavitt advanced the Escalante Eco-Region Plan, which was a blueprint for developing the area. His proposal included a jetport, golf course, and hotel complex just outside Escalante and a visitor's center at the Hole-in-the-Rock