Red Well Trailhead Road Section
Access to Coyote Gulch. 

Access is from the Hole-in-the-Rock road. 

MapBig Hollow Wash.
The Red Well road starts 30.7 miles down the Hole-in-the-Rock road at the "Red Well 1.5 mi." sign (located one-quarter mile south of Liston Seep on the Big Hollow Wash map) . The track is suitable for high-clearance vehicles. There are several campsites along the track. Do note that the Red Well trailhead is not located at Red Well, which is a mile to the southwest. (See Map Fifteen.)
0.0
At the Hole-in-the-Rock road. Go northeast.
1.0
Good camping in this area. The track becomes much rougher ahead.
1.3
End of the track. Trailhead and trail register. Limited camping. The trailhead is located at the end of the track near elevation 4530. You are in Navajo Sandstone.
Digression: The Red Well trailhead is located near the confluence of Big Hollow Wash and upper Coyote Gulch. It provides alternate access to Hurricane Wash and Coyote Gulch. Hike east down a track into Coyote Gulch. In thirty-five minutes Dry Fork Coyote comes in on the left (N). (King Mesa map.) Water may start to flow here. Pass a waterfall in a gorge on either side. The first side canyon below a hiker's maze, on the left (N), is Sleepy Hollow (LKA). (It is shown to the east of elevation 4500.)
The canyon slowly deepens and narrows. Hurricane Wash comes in as a narrow defile on the right (W). (3.5-4.5 hours.) See Hike #20 for details on exploring Coyote Gulch from Hurricane Wash to the Escalante River.
A popular continuation of this hike goes up the Escalante River from its confluence with Coyote Gulch to Fools Canyon. Make your way up Fools Canyon through a thick tangle of brush (some poison ivy), over and around beaver dams and ponds, down a cliff (Class 5.1, 30', belay and lower packs), until you are above a huge pool. (Immediately above the pool the thrashing ends and the canyon floor is slickrock.) Exit the canyon on the left (LUC)(SW) by way of a constructed cattle trail (described in Hike #21). Cross broken terrain to the west end of King Mesa (near elevation 5294). From there the Red Well trailhead may be visible. Descend into Coyote Gulch (many options) and return to the trailhead. (Four to five days for the complete loop.)
Historical note: Red Well was developed by rancher Ursel "Red" Shirts. The Shirts family, consisting of Carl Shirts, his wife, and