creekbed and cottonwood trees line the canyon. Pass a waterfall at an abrupt left turn in the canyon on a steep trail to the right. It ducks under a grove of boxelder trees and through a healthy patch of poison ivy. From the base of the fall, look up and note a natural bridge. The canyon narrows and the walls are lined with small hanging gardens that contain maidenhair ferns, monkeyflowers, and columbines. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
The crux narrows
The wading starts shortly in a stretch of serpentine narrows. Depending on present conditions, there may be a couple of stretches of deep wading or even a stroke or two of swimming. Rock climbers can chimney over the deepest pools. Willow Gulch enters the canyon on the right (S) at a pronounced ''Vee." (Davis Gulch map.) (1.5-2.5 hours.)
Digression: The combined drainages of Fortymile Creek and Willow Gulch open downcanyon as you near Lake Powell. Adequate campsites and the lure of a swim make this a pleasant place to nest for a night.
Up Willow Gulch
Willow Gulch also contains a short stretch of narrows in its lower reaches that may require deep wading. A large chockstone blocked this gorge until 1955 when a local rancher "removed" the obstacle with twenty sticks of dynamite. The canyon soon opens and Broken Bow Arch appears. There is good camping in the area. (1.0 hour.)
Historical note: Broken Bow Arch was named by Edson Alvey after he found a broken bow under the arch during a trip to the canyon in 1930. Alvey, born and raised in Escalante, taught school there for many years.
To the trailhead
A half hour above the arch the canyon divides in an area of cottonwoods and cattails. (Sooner Bench map.) The springs stop flowing in this vicinity. The sand-and rock-floored main canyon goes to the left (S). Go right (W) into a canyon partially blocked with vegetation. (0.5 hours.)
In ten minutes the canyon divides. A row of Moqui steps is visible from the confluence on a wall to the west-northwest. Go right (NW). The canyon (shown to the north of elevation 4202) immediately narrows, opens a tad, then really narrows. Tackle the slot, which is short and great fun, or pass it on the left (LUC).