fall. Summer is too hot to do the complete loop. If you do a oneway trip by hiking down the Escalante River to the Highway 12 bridge, summer is fine.
Time:
27.0 to 39.5 hours. Five to seven days for the complete loop. 16.0 to 25.0 hours. Three to four days if you hike down the Escalante River to the Highway 12 bridge.
Elevation range:
5320' to 8400'.
Water:
There is a perennial flow of water in Sand Creek and the Escalante River. Water is a problem on the return route. The text that follows notes water sources.
Maps:
Roger Peak, Escalante, and Calf Creek.
Skill level:
Moderately difficult route finding. Class 4 climbing with little exposure. Lots of wading and a stretch or two of swimming, which is avoidable. This is an exceedingly difficult hike that is suitable only for experienced canyoneers who are fit. Low-impact camping skills are essential. This route is not recommended for novice canyoneers, youngsters, or youth groups.
Special equipment:
Wading boots, one inner tube for every two or three people, large garbage bags or river-type dry bags, and special dry bags for camera equipment and valuables. A forty-foot climbing rope is adequate.
Note:
This route has been designed for hardcore canyoneers who are in excellent condition. The return route is long, arduous, and has little water. Most will not want to do Sand Creek as a loop hike. The best option after reaching the Escalante River is to follow it down to the Highway 12 bridge. Some may wonder if it is possible to hike up Sand Creek from the Escalante River and use it for the return journey after going down Death Hollow. A group of friends and I did it. The consensus: It is hell on earth.
Land status:
This route is in Box-Death Hollow Wilderness Area and Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
"Beauty and the Beast," Madame Villeneuve's tale, is an apt image for a hike down Sand Creek. Although the canyon has its moments of greatness, its beauty is shadowed by the difficulty of passage. This hike is a thrash. The route alternates between wading down a slippery boulder-choked stream or battling impenetrable stands of big sagebrush, willows, tamarisks, and wild rose bushes with their attendant thorns. Those are the disadvantages. The advantage is that you will have the canyon to yourself. The route starts on the Hells Backbone road near the top of