Hike north up the West Fork of Choprock Canyon. There is much bush bashing, boulder scrambling, and other assorted obstacles. Medium springs and potholes appear from time to time. As you near the top of the canyon, it narrows and steepens. Climb directly up a pour-off (Class 5.6, 25'). The second challenge is a difficult face (Class 5.7, 10') that starts in a pool below a large natural bridge. The canyon above contains a second large natural bridge and a pothole arch. If the pour-offs below the bridges are too difficult, pass them on the right (LUC).
To exit the canyon, climb over the second bridge and up to a ledge system on the right (LUC)(E) side of the canyon. Follow ledges downcanyon past several large caves for ten minutes to the first possible exit to the left (E), a row of Moqui steps that goes over the left edge of a cave (Class 5.5, 60').
Hike northeast to the top of the Navajo and to elevation 6042T. Follow the rim of the West Fork north until it is possible to cross it. Hike south along its west rimalong the Kayentato the Moqui steps you explored earlier. (7.5-11.0 hours.)
The likelihood of finding water diminishes rapidly the farther up Choprock Canyon you hike. By the time the canyon dividesin fifty minutesyou are in the Chinle and the canyon will be dry. Stay in the main canyon to the left (NW) (shown to the east of elevation 5665T).
Pieces of an old mining track now appear. Follow the track as closely as possible. At the head of the canyon (near elevation 5626AT on the Horse Pasture Mesa map) the track becomes more pronounced. Passing through the Circle Cliffs, the track turns first northeast, then north, and passes under the eastern prow of Silver Falls Bench (elevation 6618T). The track goes near the edge of a cliff. The dry, sinuous bed of Moody Creek will be visible from time to time to the east.
As you pass Colt Mesa the remnants of a uranium mining encampment will be visible on its west side. (This is at mile 11.8 on the Moody road.) The track turns southwest into Silver Falls Creek and after a mile drops to the floor of the canyon. Depending on where you left your car, go up or down the canyon back to the trailhead. (4.5-6.0 hours.)
Deer PointAn AscentHike #36
Season:
Any.
Time:
5.0 to 7.0 hours.
Elevation range:
6080' to 7265'.