Oil Development
The Circle Cliffs Basin area of the Escalante drainage system contains the Circle Cliffs Special Tar Sands Area. Covering a total of 49,000 acres, the Tar Sands Area encloses the top and middle portions of Horse Canyon, Wolverine Creek, Little Death Hollow, and the North Fork of Silver Falls Creek. Some of the Tar Sands Area reaches the Escalante River.
In the 1980s developers proposed a massive oil drilling and recovery program in the bowl formed by the Circle Cliffs. Industry plans included drilling ninety-seven production wells and 27,000 injection and recovery wells, building 197 miles of power lines and pipelines, and assembling eleven four-story compressor-dehydrator plants. Access to the area would have been eased by widening and realigning the Burr Trail and constructing many miles of new roads, some cutting up through the Circle Cliffs to the benches above the canyons. Huge eighteen-wheel tank trucks would have run day and night-as many as 140 every twentyfour hours.
The work force would have been housed in a 640-acre industrial park at the head of Wolverine Creek that included power and sewage plants, an air strip, and housing for 500 employees. The payoff in terms of actual oil production would have been minuscule compared to the irreversible damage inflicted on a nearly pristine landscape: only 14 million barrels of oilenough to supply the nation for only a single daywould have been recovered if the project was economically feasible, which it was not.
In 1993 Australian-owned, Houston-based BHP Petroleum proposed drilling in the Studhorse Peaks area just off the Burr Trail near the Capitol Reef National Park boundary. The project would have entailed building two miles of new road. The drilling plan was stopped by environmental groups.
In 1995 Viking Exploration, Inc. of Colorado proposed drilling an oil well near upper Middle Moody Canyon within the boundaries of Glen Canyon National Recreation Area. To make this possible, Viking will have to rebuild eight miles of old uranium mining roads that are now closed and construct five new miles of road. This oil well is still a possibility.
The 1996 hiking season started with the rhythmic thump-thump-thump of a diesel engine at an oil drilling rig on a state land parcel at the junction of the Hole-in-the-Rock road and the Fortymile Ridge road. We could hear the racket at our camp just below King Mesa several miles away. After more than eighty days of drilling, the hole was found to be dry.