Gas Development
In 1988 Box-Death Hollow Wilderness Area was threatened by carbon dioxide mining. Under a development plan approved by the U.S. Forest Service, sixty-five carbon dioxide wells, thirty-two oil wells, fifty-three miles of new roads, and 127 miles of pipelines and power lines were to be built on the high, thin ridges that divide Pine Creek, Death Hollow, and Sand Creek. The Forest Service admitted that "visual and auditory impacts" to the area would be "largely unavoidable and significant" and that sedimentation of the creeks and displacement of wildlife would be inevitable.
Roads
Perhaps the most senseless proposal for the Escalante region was the Trans-Escalante Federal Parkway. This 117-mile-long high-speed highway was to start at Bullfrog Basin on Lake Powell, traverse the top of the Waterpocket Fold, cross a bridge built over the Escalante River just below Stevens Arch, climb up and over the Kaiparowits Plateau, or under its eastern end, and terminate near Big Water, Arizona. The plan called for paving the Hole-in-the-Rock road to provide access from Escalante to contemplated marinas either at Hole-in-the-Rock or the mouth of Llewellyn Gulch.
The proposal was serious and, as part of a larger bill that established Glen Canyon National Recreation Area in 1971, funds were requested to finance the Trans-Escalante Federal Parkway. During hearings before Congress on the proposal, two opposing views of the parkway were presented.
The late Calvin Black, a commissioner from San Juan County and a well-known development advocate, stated in his testimony: "Without a road there will be less than 10 percent of that area that will ever be seen, even by the most vivid or avid outdoorsman there is. So I think this will give us some sort of perspective. Now, I think one other statement that really could be said of this, if we build these roads, compared to the vastnessthe areas, the bench areas that will protect it from being seenif we do this, if we build these roads, I think you can literally say that it will make about as much scar, when considering the whole area, as if you were to plow the ocean, and I think that is almost literal."
June Viavant, representing the Sierra Club and the Wasatch Mountain Club, testified against the parkway. She said: "The road planned across the Escalante wilderness would be, for all but a few miles, built for a design speed of 60 miles per hour. Driving through at 60 miles an hour would reduce the subtleties of that beautiful country, its own peculiar twists and turns, to a blur of slick-rock with an arch or two. This road would only enable more and more people to see less and less. People deserve to have a chance to be drawn into