To Ringtail Canyon
Hike down Neon Canyon to the Escalante River. Wade downriver for a couple of hundred yards and exit the canyon at the first opportunity by using an old constructed cattle trail (NE). It will take you to the top of the Wingate and to the rim of a Kayenta-walled side canyon. Leave the trail here and continue the along-the-rim traverse.
Alternate route: The purist may not want to hike down the Escalante River even for a short distance. To avoid wading, do not drop into Neon Canyon on the cattle trail. Instead, follow ledges northeast along the top of the inner gorge of Neon Canyon for a mile to the first place you can enter the inner gorge (east of elevation 5133T). A handline down a twenty-foot wall is recommended. Good camping and large potholes are in the area. Exit the east side of the gorge by using a row of Moqui steps (Class 5.1, 30'). Now make your way south-southeast past the east side of a prominent dome (elevation 5270T) and follow a shallow drainage until you are above the Escalante River. You may find an old constructed cattle trail. Catch the standard route here.
Ringtail Canyon (AN) is the next canyon encountered. (Ringtail Canyon is not named on the map. It is shown between elevations 5235T and 4988T.) Cross the canyon at the first opportunity. Large potholes can be found up-and downcanyon. (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Rock climber's note: Ringtail Canyon is an excellent short technical slot. It usually requires wading, and after recent rains, extensive swimming. There are a couple of moderate (Class 5.6, 20') drops. A fifty-foot rope is essential. Moqui steps festoon one of the drops. Near the bottom of the slot it gets very dark. To return to the top of Ringtail Canyon, hike down the Escalante River for a quarter mile and locate a constructed cattle trail that goes east to the rim of the canyon. Follow the rim north to Ringtail Canyon. (2.5-4.0 hours.)
To Baker Canyon
Return to the rim of the Escalante escarpment and head south. After you head several small side canyons a major canyon comes in from the northeast. This is Baker Canyon. (Baker Canyon is not named on the map. It is shown one-half mile east of elevation 4990T.) (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Baker Canyon is very long, ending near the Circle Cliffs, and can only be crossed near its many-branched head. Most of these branches contain large potholes that may take some scouting to find. (Scorpion Gulch map.)
After heading the canyon, return to the rim of the Escalante escarpment. A unique arch in a huge pothole on the rim of the canyon is worth searching for. (Egypt map.)