Elevation range:
Part 14650' to 5880'. 

Part 24540' to 5860'.
Maps:
Egypt and Silver Falls Bench.
Skill level:
Moderate route finding. Class 3 + scrambling. There is a lot of elevation loss and gain. Lots of wading. This is a moderately strenuous hike. If done as an overnighter, low-impact camping skills are essential.
Special equipment:
Wading boots.
Land status:
This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument and Glen Canyon National Recreation Area.
A mundane start on a boring plain leads to an unexpected expanse of peerless slickrock, striking views of the upper Escalante drainage, and entrance into a redoubtable canyon. Although the route is tiring, the toil is worth the effort.
The route comes in two parts. Part 1 starts on Allen Dump, a high bench to the northwest of Egypt, and descends a rambunctious ridge into lower Harris Wash. A short stroll down the Escalante River leads to an old cattle trail that takes you out of the canyon. A steep scramble up an imposing wall ends the hike.
Part 2 continues down the Escalante River to Fence Canyon. After exiting at Fence Canyon, the route crosses a corner of Egypt and ascends a slickrock rib to the top of an escarpment. A short stroll leads back to the trailhead.
Part 1: To Harris Wash
(Egypt map and Map Sixteen.) Hike north-northwest across a juniper-and-pinyon plain until the deep gorge mentioned in the road section is in view. Follow its course northwest. Stay on the plain; do not drop to the rim of the canyon. The plain ends at a steep Navajo slab. Descend it, then cross the top of, or go around, a squat, flat-topped butte (elevation 5728T on the Silver Falls Bench map). You are now between two canyons. Descend slickrock to the left (W) rim of the canyon to the right (NE) (shown one-quarter mile east of elevation 5513T) and follow its rim down until you are above Harris Wash. A steep slab at the junction of Harris Wash and the side canyon is studded with faded Moqui steps. (Map Seventeen.) They lead into Harris Wash (Class 3 +). (2.5-3.5 hours.)
Down Harris Wash
Hike and wade downcanyon. Near the Escalante River Navajo Sandstone gives way to the Kayenta Formation. Good camping can