A large bench below the Straight Cliffs to the south is called Fiftymile Bench.
The track to the right (SW) goes to Batty Pass Caves. A sign at its start states "Dead End Road." Follow the main track for 2.3 miles to a junked car on the left. Three large caverns on a ledge to the left were excavated in the mid-1950s by Bill and Cliff Lichtenhahn. The brothers filled the caves with machinery that they used to cut and polish rock and to build lapidary machines for others. The partially completed hull of a boat they planned to use on Lake Powell sits in one cave.
26.0
"Tee." Track to the right (S) goes to Coyote Holes. High-clearance vehicles can follow the track for 1.1 miles, past a corral and windmill, to a washout. 4WD vehicles can continue for about another mile to Coyote Holes at the end of the track. It is now a dry wash lined with tamarisks. This was the location of the Hole-in-the-Rock expedition's third camp. They had to dig for water at the Holes.
28.2
Cattle guard.
28.8
Cross Big Hollow Wash. The USGS Board on Geographic Names named it Big Hollow Wash because, "The dry drain or hollow was the widest (biggest) at the point of crossing in the days of wagon travel."
30.2
"Tee." Short track to the left (E) goes to Liston Seep, named for a large extended family who moved to Escalante in the 1880s.
30.7
"Tee." Signed Red Well track on the left (NE). See the Red Well Road Section for details.
31.0
Cattle guard. Track to the left goes to a line shack and Red Well.
32.9
"Tee." Signed 4WD track to Chimney Rock on the left (NE).
33.6
Cattle guard. Line shack at Willow Tank is to the left.
33.8
Signed Hurricane Wash trailhead by the side of the road on the right. See the Hurricane Wash Trailhead Road Section for details.
34.1
"Tee." Signed "50 Mile Bench" track to the right (SW). This road is very steep and is not recommended for access to Fiftymile Bench. Use the Sooner Slide road (at mile 43.4) instead.
34.8
(Sooner Bench map.) Cross the south fork of Hurricane Wash. A section of the original Hole-in-the-Rock road cuts across the switchbacks.
36.1
"Tee." Signed "40 Mile Ridge" track to the left (NE). This track provides access to Hikes #20 through 23. See the Fortymile Ridge Road Section for details.