sional definition of wilderness. These acres have been included in the UWC-sponsored America's Red Rocks Wilderness Act. This bill has been introduced into Congress as H.R. 1500.
In the winter of 1995 the wilderness battle heated to hellish temperatures. The Utah congressional delegation, emboldened by the 1994 elections, introduced Senate Bill 884 and House of Representative Bill 1745, both of which sought to set aside only 1.8 million acres of land as wilderness in all of Utah. The bills also contained "hard release" language which meant that any land not designated as wilderness could never be considered for wilderness in the future. In addition, the House and Senate bills would have left wilderness areas open to off-road vehicles and the construction of roads, dams, pipelines, and communication antennas. It was only through the efforts of the Utah Wilderness Coalition and a filibuster led by New Jersey Senator Bill Bradley that the bills were defeated.
In the fall of 1996 Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt and Utah Representative Jim Hansen, recognizing the inadequacies of the first wilderness inventory, initiated a reinventory of BLM lands in Utah. This reinventory raised the number of acres that met the congressional definition of wilderness from 5.7 million acres to more than 6.0 million acres.
Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument
An important and unexpected development in protecting the Escalante took place in September 1996 when President Bill Clinton, using provisions of the Antiquities Act of 1906, established Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument. Encompassing 1.7 million acres, including the Grand Staircase, Kaiparowits Plateau, and upper Paria Canyon and its tributaries, the new national monument will help protect some of the wildest land in America. In the Escalante area, several hundred thousand acres that were formerly managed by the Bureau of Land Management under its multiple-use mandate are now in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
The immediate effect of the national monument designation was to stop the issuance of all new mineral leases. This effectively put an end to the proposed Andalex coal mine on the Kaiparowits Plateau. This huge mine, fought intensely by the environmental community, would have changed the character of southern Utah and adversely impacted the Kaiparowits Plateau, a pristine 650,000-acre upland and canyon area that is south and west of the Escalante canyons. President Clinton, when announcing the formation of the monument, stated: "I am concerned about a large coal mine proposed for the area. Mining jobs are good jobs, and mining is important to our national economy and to our national security. But we