and descend into the canyon. It takes about 1.5 hours to reach the arch.
42.1
Cattle guard.
42.4
Cross Cottonwood Wash.
43.1
Cross the north fork of Willow Gulch.
43.4
''Tee." Signed "50 Mile Bench" track to the right (SW). This track goes up Sooner Slide to Fiftymile Bench. It is suitable for high-clearance vehicles.
44.3
Cross the south fork of Willow Gulch.
45.4
Cattle guard. Cave Point is to the right (SW). The caves are in Entrada Sandstone.
45.7
Start of Fiftymile Creek Hike #25. "Tee." There is a track and parking to the right (SW) just before the bottom of a hill. The track itself goes to beautiful Cave Spring. You are at elevation 4237 and are in the Carmel Formation.
47.2
Signed Glen Canyon National Recreation Area boundary.
47.6
"The Soda" sign. This is labeled as Soda Spring on the map. The spring is a short distance downcanyon. Three springs have been claimed as the Fiftymile Spring used by the Hole-in-the-Rock expedition. Evidence is inconclusive about which was actually used. This is the first possibility.
48.1
"Y." Follow the main road to the left. The short road to the right goes to Fiftymile Spring, which is called The Sodie by locals. It is the second spring that may have been used by the Hole-in-the-Rock expedition. Fiftymile Spring flows from an overhang in a small canyon a quarter mile to the left of the end of the road. A historic line shack here was burned by an arsonist in 1996. Several rows of Moqui steps lead up the cliffs behind the cabin site and cowboy glyphs dating from the early 1900s can be found on the Entrada Sandstone walls.
49.1
(Davis Gulch map.) Cross Fiftymile Creek. The third spring that may have been used by the Hole-in-the-Rock expedition is a short walk up the wash. It has the largest flow of the three springs and is considered the most likely camp by local historians. The expedition, finding no water near the Hole-in-the-Rock, divided: half staved at this spring, the other half camped at the top of the Hole-in-the-Rock. Blizzards, a lack of food and forage, and a paucity of wood for fuel became major problems. The expedition stalled here for two months while the route was built down the Hole-in-the-Rock to the