tween the Great Salt Lake and the Wasatch Mountains to the east had been explored. The famous trapper Jedediah Smith, and others, had written of the fertile valley. Although a branch of the Old Spanish Trail cut near the area, it was still remote and only sparsely inhabited.
Brigham Young realized that the Mormons would have to colonize as much of their new land as possible. There were several reasons for this. First, the federal government wanted to control the land, not because it needed it, but because it did not want the Mormons to dominate it. Young wanted the Mormons to take possession quickly before the government could formalize its opposition. Second, the land in Utah was sparsely populated and was considered free for the taking. The third factor was the burgeoning Mormon population. Finally, Young understood that by establishing settlements throughout the country, he could create a buffer to hold back the gentiles, or non-Mormons.
Colonization in southern Utah was very successful, although not necessarily for the reasons the settlements were initially established. Called ''missions," settlement efforts were organized and financed by the Mormon church.
The first sizeable mission was the Iron Mission of 1850, which established the towns of Cedar City and Parowan. There were good iron-ore deposits in the area and an abundance of juniper (which they called cedar), which was turned into the coke used to fire iron smelters. Unfortunately the Iron Mission was not successful in making quality pig iron; there was a problem with the smelting process that was never solved. Nonetheless, the new settlers were able to farm and to utilize the rangelands in the area.
The second was the Cotton, or Dixie, Mission of the late 1850s, which was centered around the town of St. George. The Cotton Mission was formed in response to the Civil War to produce cotton and grapes for wine. Brigham Young thought that the land in the Virgin River Basin would be good for these crops. Unfortunately the Dixie Mission was not economically successful; but, like the Iron Mission, it did open a large area to farming and ranching. The settlements of Kanab and St. George were results of the Dixie Mission.
The Iron and Dixie missions were located on the west side of the Colorado River. The land to the east, between the Uncompahgre and San Juan mountains in Colorado and the Colorado River in Utah, was largely uninhabited. The gold and silver booms in Colorado brought a trickle of prospectors and ranchers into the desert country to the east of the river. The only other residents were Indians and outlaw whites. Although lightly populated with settlers, Brigham Young knew that it was just a matter of time before non Mormons could gain control of this vital region. A buffer of Mormon settlements would slow or stop the encroachment.