Elevation range:
5720' to 7000'.
Maps:
King Bench and Steep Creek Bench.
Skill level:
Difficult route finding. Class 3 scrambling. This is a moderately strenuous hike. Some wading. Familiarity with low-impact camping skills is essential.
Special equipment:
Wading shoes.
Land status:
This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
Steep and hot. Not exactly two adjectives one would want to see used to describe canyons on a proposed hike. Although there is some correlation between the canyons on this route and their names, the connection is not absolute. Steep Creek really isn't, for the most part, and Hot Canyon isn't, if the weather is cooperating.
There are some who put this hike down due to the cattle damage in lower Steep Creek. The initial cow-pie-lined trudge, though, leads to one of the finest and least-visited sections of canyon in the Escalante.
The route starts on the Burr Trail and follows a constructed cattle trail into Steep Creek. It then goes up Steep Creek, crosses a high ridge, and descends Hot Canyon. A short cross-country jaunt leads back to the trailhead.
Into Steep Creek
(King Bench map and Map Forty-one.) Hike northwest along the track. In two minutes it divides. The main track goes to the left (S). Go right (N). In 100 yards the track dies in the sand. You are now in a gap between two domes. (The dome to the north has a "WC" [witness corner] labeled on its south side on the map.)
An established and still used cattle trail begins at the gap and goes northeast along the left (NW) side of a shallow northeast-running drainage. As you near Steep Creek, pass through a wire gate and descend a constructed portion of cattle trail to the canyon floor. You are in the Kayenta Formation and there are large springs in this section of the canyon. (0.5 hours.)
Note: This cattle trail, and a line shack in Steep Creek, are incorrectly placed on the King Bench map.
Up Steep Creek
(Steep Creek Bench map.) Cattle trails ease your passage through thick vegetation as you proceed upcanyon. An old tin line