Exit Boulder Creek
From the confluence, hike up the left (LUC)(W) side of Boulder Creek for fifty yards and climb a short slab dotted with worn Moqui steps. Scramble a couple of hundred feet up to the top of the first cliff band. Follow a wide terrace west along the rim of Boulder Creek for fifteen minutes to the first canyon that comes in on the left (W) (shown one-half mile north of elevation 6065).
Follow this steep canyon up through a sharp right-hand turn to its apparent end at a fall. (Calf Creek map.) Pass the fall in a gully to the left (LUC), then drop back into the canyon.
The canyon continues to circle to the right, then steepens and narrows. Pinyons, junipers, and buffaloberry bushes line the drainage. Near its head, the canyon divides several times. Stay in the main canyon until it becomes impossible to tell which canyon is the main one. Exit the canyon completely, then make your way northwest to the top of a ridge. Discrepancies here will not matter. Highway 12 and the trailhead will be visible to the west. (2.5-3.5 hours.)
Upper Boulder Creek and Dry HollowHike #6
Season:
Spring before or after spring runoff, summer, or fall.
Time:
4.0 to 6.0 hours.
Elevation range:
5400' to 6120'.
Water:
Water availability is not a problem on this hike. Boulder Creek has a perennial flow of water. Dry Hollow has a seasonal flow.
Map:
Calf Creek.
Skill level:
Easy route finding. Class 2 walking. During periods of high water there will be some wading. This is a moderately easy dayhike.
Special equipment:
Wading boots. There are wild rose bushes on this route; some may wish to wear long pants.
Land status:
This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
The newcomer to the Escalante is faced with a daunting taskfiguring out which hike to do first! If you have little canyon experience and are looking for a short hike with little chance of getting lost, this is the one. Short stretches of off-trail hiking combine with a lovely creek and the historic Claude V. cutoff road to provide an exemplary canyon experience. This is one of the finest and funnest short dayhikes in the region.