The hike starts on the Hogback section of Highway 12, drops to Boulder Creek, and then follows it upcanyon until near the town of Boulder. The Claude V. cutoff road, an abandoned wagon road, leads back to the trailhead. Although Boulder Creek has been damaged by cattle, the stretch along the old wagon road more than makes up for this.
To Boulder Creek
(Calf Creek map and Map Nine.) Before you start, look north and locate a road cut on the hillside. You will come down that road at the end of the hike.
Descend a hillside to the east into a wide steep drainage. Follow it down until you are on a cliff above Boulder Creek. Cut left a few paces and descend the remnants of a constructed cattle trail to the canyon floor. (The lower portion of this route into Boulder Creek is also used in Hike #5.)
Up Boulder Creek
Walk and wade upcanyon along sandy benches and through short stretches of willows and wild roses. In forty-five minutes the canyon divides at a sharp corner. The narrow, hard-to-see entrance to Dry Hollow is to the left (W). Boulder Creek, which you will follow, is to the right (NNE).
The canyon slowly widens. After an hour cross a barb-wire fence that stretches across the canyon. Five minutes upcanyon spot a two-strand power line that crosses the canyon. It marks the exit. (2.5-3.5 hours.)
The wagon road
Hike southwest up a steep hillside strewn with lava boulders until you are under the power lines. Follow them uphill (S) to the top of a rise. You will intersect the Claude V. cutoff road here. Dry Hollow and Highway 12 are visible to the south.
Historical note: The Claude V cutoff road was built in 1924 as a shortcut for those going from Escalante to lower Boulder town. Although primarily traveled by wagons, pack animals, and cattle, automobiles were occasionally used. (See ''The Highway 12 Area" chapter for more details on this road.) Hop a log fence and follow the road to the floor of Dry Hollow.
The road is adequately cairned as it crosses sandy areas. If you lose the road, simply follow the course of the power lines.
The road from the bottom of Dry Hollow up the cliffs to the southwest back to the trailhead no longer follows the power lines. If you miss the road, which is easy to do in the thick vegetation of the