shack to the river is not accurately drawninstead of going down a point to the southeast of the shack, the trail goes down the point to the southwest.
There is a narrow canyon to the east of the line shack (shown one-quarter mile west of elevation 5441). Follow its left (LUC)(W) rim north until the narrows end; then cut southeast across Brigham Tea Bench on rolling terrain and enter The Gulch via an old cattle trail that enters the canyon in a small draw shown at the "h" in The on the Red Breaks map. (2.5-3.5 hours.)
Out of The Gulch
Directly across The Gulch from where you entered it are three narrow east-tending canyons. You will exit the canyon via one of the three. The middle canyon, its mouth partially blocked by a V-trunked cottonwood, is the easiest of the three if a pothole 100 yards upcanyon at the base of a short fall is not full. Scramble up the fall (Class 4, 30') and immediately exit the canyon to the right (SE) by scrambling to the top up short walls and steep slabs. There is superb camping on the undulating slickrock overlooking The Gulch. (0.5 hours.)
To Horse Canyon
Walk east up the slickrock. A prominent Navajo ridge with a Ushaped notch becomes visible to the east (elevation 5562). Continue east across King Bench and pass over the southern shoulder of the prominent Navajo ridge. From the shoulder, you can see the walls of Horse Canyon. The dark red ledge-forming layer below the Navajo is the Kayenta Formation. To the northeast is the Kayenta-walled mouth of Little Death Hollow.
Continue east, over the head of a small drainage that runs south, to the edge of Horse Canyon. One bend downcanyon from the mouth of Little Death Hollow is a shallow east-facing indent in the otherwise vertical Navajo wall. The indent contains a steep slide and an old constructed cattle trail. Follow it to the canyon floor. There is a perennial flow of water and fair camping along this stretch of Horse Canyon. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
The exit route out of Horse Canyon
From the bottom of the cattle trail, go up Horse Canyon for several minutes to a fence. To the right (E) is a constructed cattle trail going up a break in the Kayenta. Fill up with water before going up the trail. The next reliable water source is in Silver Falls Creek, 4.0-6.0 hours away. Follow the cattle trail as it traverses east along Kayenta ledges and above the mouth of Little Death Hollow. A pumphouse and metal pipe are visible at the confluence. The pipe