Continue traversing the rim of the canyon until you are forced onto an intermediate Navajo ledge. Follow the ledge until it is possible to descend a steep chute to the Wingate.
The canyon with the pinnacle contains a large natural bridge on its left (LUC) side. Large potholes and excellent camping can be found in the upper arms of this canyon. (2.0-3.0 hours.)
Staying on the Wingate, head the next small side canyon. It also contains large potholes. The next side canyon is a long one (shown to the west of elevation 6531T). It also has large potholes in its upper reaches and good camping in the vicinity. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
The descent route into East Moody Canyon
Follow the north rim of the canyon west. You will be forced away from the rim by a couple of short side canyons. Return to the rim. Start to head the next short side canyon (shown one-quarter mile east of elevation 6103T). The descent route is located in a steep west-running chute that descends the south side of the short side canyon. It is choked with trees and bushes. This route is locally known as the Sheep Hunters route, since bighorn hunters often use it. When in doubt, stay to the left. A short row of Moqui steps above a large pothole and spring area helps ease the difficulty (Class 4, 10'). Descend steep boulder-strewn Chinle slopes into the main fork. This route will take some scouting to find. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
Down East Moody Canyon
The hardpacked surface of East Moody Creek makes for fast hiking. Near its junction with the West Fork are medium springs and good camping. (The West Fork is not labeled on the map. It contains elevation 5037AT on the Scorpion Gulch map.) (2.0-3.0 hours.)
From the junction of the East Fork and the West Fork, join the standard route back to the trailhead. (4.0-6.0 hours.)
The Overland RouteGeneral Description
The Overland Route describes a cross-country hike that runs parallel to the Escalante River and, with a few exceptions, stays on the high ground above the river. Skipping over benchlands and zooming in and out of canyons, this route is designed to be used in conjunction with other hikes in the guide. It starts on Highway 12 and ends at the Fortymile Ridge trailhead near Coyote Gulch. No effort has been made to make this a direct route; rather, I have chosen to make it interesting throughout its length.
The route incorporates sections that have already been described in the hikes and also includes new material. It is not intended to be