white slickrock. (The ridge contains elevations 5492T and 5387T on the Egypt map.) Hike west across small slickrock ridges and over the white slickrock to the top of the ridge. Go west-northwest across the ridge top. An arch should be visible a short distance down the hill. (The arch is one-quarter mile east of elevation 5283T.) If you cannot locate the arch, do not panic! Before you is a wide, shallow bowl. Behind it to the west is a ridge with a flattened dome on its right side. You may be able to see cars parked at the lower Early Weed Bench trailhead at the end of the road.
From the arch go northwest toward the right side of the flattened dome. Near the far side of the wide bowl intersect an old track that is now used by cattle and horses. It is the only track in the area. If you intersect deep draws or canyons that drop to the left (S), simply head them. You will eventually pick up the track. Follow it over the head of Brimstone Gulch and back to the trailhead. (3.5-4.5 hours.)
Spooky and Peek-A-Boo GulchesThe Long LoopHike #16 
Season:
Any. Recent rains will make this a tough hike.
Time:
6.0 to 8.0 hours.
Water:
There may be no water along the route. Bring your own drinking water.
Elevation range:
4670' to 5480'.
Maps:
Egypt and Big Hollow Wash.
Skill level:
Moderate route finding. Class 5.0 climbing. The leader must be experienced with belay techniques and be capable of leading the climbing sections without protection. There may be some wading. This is a strenuous hike that is suitable only for those in excellent condition. Those on the stout side cannot make it through the incredibly tight narrows. This slot is not suitable for claustrophobes, novice slot canyoneers, youngsters, or youth groups.
Special equipment:
Wading boots and a forty-foot rope are required. Bring a small day pack; a large one will not fit through the narrows.
Land status:
This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
Often a landform with a bold, descriptive, mysterious name is enough to pique one's interest. Death Hollow, Harveys Fear Canyon, Hidden Passage Canyon, and Lost Eden Canyon are classic