Protecting the Environment
Today's desert traveler must pick his way between the immensity and the fragility. For many of us the refreshment of the waterless has become a necessity, whatever the warring concepts about our impact. Accepting the fact of our flesh bringing down our boots with care, we can still, if briefly, give predictability the slip. For to walk into the desert is to deal one's life a wild card.

Bruce Berger, 1990
The increase in backcountry use in the Escalante has led to unintentional degradation of the land. Our continued and unrestricted use of this land is contingent on each person's commitment to protect the environment. There are a number of things we as individuals can do. None are difficult; none take much effort. The goal is to leave the desert as you found itor better.
The meticulous practice of "leave-no-trace" camping techniques can help spare the land; but this is no longer enough. We must now become our brother's keeper. It is our responsibility to clean up the mess left by others. Leave room in your pack for extra garbage. Spend ten minutes breaking up an old fire ring, blocking offa redundant trail, or restoring an ill-used campsite. Insensitive hikers can no longer be tolerated. It is our obligation to help educate those who do not know and to chastise those who do know but do not care.
Some of the techniques used to minimize impacts on desert lands have changed over the years. Readers of Canyoneering 1 and Canyoneering 2 should read the following section and abide by the changes it makes in earlier practices. All users of such lands should adhere to these concepts and practices.
Please read the following section carefully.
Group size: One of the biggest problems land managers have in the Escalante is overly large hiking groups. Although group size is limited to twelve, a voluntary limit is eight people. If your group is larger than twelve, it must break into two or more smaller groups. The groups must hike and camp at least one-half mile apart.
Bill Wolverton, a backcountry ranger for many years in the Escalante, notes that: "Compliance with the [group size] rule is a joke. Most groups seem to think that camping across the creek, around the bend, or maybe 100 yards apart, is compliance. Very often, the group has one stove or one set of pots, or their meals are packaged together, so they end up together for meals anyway. Sometimes groups even think that filling out two permits is good enough."