Another Fremont stronghold was in Harris Wash, which was occupied from late Pueblo I to Pueblo III periods (A.D. 900 to 1200), with the highest use during the latter part of that period. During excavations in the late 1950s and early 1960s, archaeologists found forty-eight major sites in Harris Wash. Only two were well defined habitations. The rest consisted of campsites under overhangs, lithic scatters, and rock art panels. A large number of storage cists or granaries suggests that Harris Wash was heavily populated. Analysis of pottery found in the canyon indicates that there was light useperhaps during hunting or trading trips through the canyon by Anasazi Indians.
It is known that the Fremont rarely went into Escalante Canyon proper except in the area near the present town of Escalante, but they did regularly traverse the base of the Kaiparowits Plateau to the Colorado River and frequented many of the side canyons.
The Fremont abandoned the Escalante area by A.D. 1250. Their collapse has been attributed to a long period of drought. The Fremont, though, were a tough people who had shown themselves capable of adapting to almost any condition. A more likely scenario is that Numic-speaking groups from the southwestern part of the Great Basin either forced the Fremont out or absorbed them into their own cultures. These Numic-speaking Indians-the Ute, Piute, and Shoshoniare discussed later in this chapter.
Anasazi Indians were descendants of a Basketmaker culture that developed along the banks of the Colorado River and populated the Four Corners Region. The Anasazi were quick to assimilate innovations that originated in Mexico and Arizona. They developed a complex agricultural society: planting corn, beans, and squash, building irrigation systems, and domesticating turkeys and dogs. The arts flourished.
The hallmark of the Anasazi was their architecture. Extensive multistoried complexes of rooms built from shaped sandstone slabs held together with clay mortar and often plastered with mud are common, especially in areas east of the Colorado River. In the Escalante drainage the dwellings are smaller and less extensive, but many still exhibit the same fine craftsmanship.
The first Anasazi arrived in the Escalante area during the late Basketmaker II Period (approximately A.D. 500). Crossing the Colorado River from their homeland in the San Juan River area to the southeast and from northeast Arizona, the initial forays of these "Kayenta" Anasazis did not result in permanent habitations. The first area scouted was the Waterpocket Fold between the gap at Deer Point and the Escalante River. Archaeologists have found the oldest Anasazi sites there.