Technical Canyoneering
Canyoneering, as it is called, is a sport in its infancy, just starting to be avidly practiced in the labyrinthine Southwest . . . . But as with any young sport, the leading practitioners are still more or less improvising as the go.

David Roberts, 1996
There are many opportunities for technical canyoneering in the Escalante. Although this guide book does not detail routes through difficult technical canyons, it is imperative that safety issues and environmental concerns be addressed. This essay is not meant to be a primer on technical canyoneering; rather, it is meant to give canyoneers some ideas to think about.
The term "canyoneering" is ambiguous. If one hikes in the canyons, does that mean he or she is a canyoneer? or do you have to scale vertical walls and descend slots using ropes and technical climbing gear in order to properly use the appellation?
The first person to use the term "canyoneer" in print was Frederick Dellenbaugh of the Powell expedition down the Colorado River in 1872. The next time the term surfaced was among early river runners on the San Juan and Colorado rivers. A famed river runner from that period, Otis "Dock" Marsten, applied the term only to those who had "completed the traverse" of the Colorado River through the Grand Canyon. He considered those doing lesser rivers to be mere "river rats."
Others used "canyoneering" in a generic sense, applying the term to all who ran rivers. As river running became more sophisticated and a scale of difficulty developed for the sport, "canyoneering" disappeared from river lexicon and was increasingly applied to those who explored canyons on foot.
Today a canyoneer is defined as one who hikes in canyons. Technical canyoneering is the act of traveling through canyons using technical rock-climbing techniques such as rappelling, belaying, and ascending or descending rock walls using rock climbing equipment. Negotiating stretches of moving water by swimming or using flotation devices can also be added to the definition of technical canyoneering.
A slot canyoneer is a person who ascends or descends slot canyons, and a technical slot canyoneer is one who descends or ascends slot canyons using specialized canyoneering techniques and rock-climbing equipment.
Common usage defines a slot canyon as one whose walls are generally no farther apart than the distance of outstretched arms. Some argue with this definition and say that if you do not have to