12.1
"Tee." Signed Devils Garden road on the right (S). The first documented visit to this wonderful area was by Jack Sumner, a member of the Thompson-Dellenbaugh expedition in 1872. There is no evidence that the Hole-in-the-Rock trekkers saw the area. Strange "hoodoo" shapes and Metate Arch make this a great place to wander. Escalante schoolteacher Edson Alvey named both Devils Garden and Metate Arch. There are picnic tables, grills, and an outhouse. No overnight camping.
13.7
"Tee." Signed Collet Top road on the right (SE).
14.2
Signed Twenty Mile Wash. A spring a short distance up the wash marked the second camp for the Hole-in-the-Rock expedition. Again, George Decker: "Up to 20 Mile Gulch, feed good water bad." The trekkers had to dig in the sand to procure sufficient water.
14.3
Cattle guard.
16.5
(Sunset Flat map.) "Tee." Signed Egypt road on the left (NE). This road provides access to Hikes #12 through 14 and to the Twentyfive Mile Wash trailhead. See the Egypt Road Section for details.
16.6
Garfield County/Kane County line.
17.0
Cross Rat Seep Hollow. The name comes from a small seep in the hollow that was often full of dead rats.
17.3
Onto Sunset Flat. Local ranchers named this large, flat area. The jutting bench to the right (SE) that drops off the Straight Cliffs almost to the Hole-in-the-Rock road is called White Point.
19.8
"Tee." Track to the left (E). Sign states "Caution 4 Wheel Drive Only." This track provides alternate, and rough, access to the Early Weed Bench trailhead.
23.5
(Basin Canyon map.) Signed Cat Pasture. Cat Pasture, named for an abundance of bobcats that used to inhabit the area, is to the left (NE).
23.6
"Tee." Signed Early Weed Bench road on the left (ESE). This road provides access to Hikes #15 through 18. See the Early Weed Bench Road Section for details.
23.8
Cattle guard. Corral on the right.
24.0
Cattle guard. Cat Well is to the left. The wash to the left (N) is the head of Dry Fork Coyote.
25.9
(Big Hollow Wash map.) Four-way junction. Signed Dry Fork track to the left (E). This track provides access to Hike #19. See the Dry Fork Coyote Road Section for details.