Twentyfive Mile Wash
Twentyfive Mile Wash contains several interesting side canyons that are worth exploring.
Digression: The first canyon on the left (SE) (shown to the east of elevation 4915T) contains a short set of narrows and can be used as an exit out of the canyon onto the area known as Scorpion (see Historical note, Early Weed Bench Road Section).
As the main canyon widens, the Wingate walls are supplanted by the less severe Kayenta Formation.
The first canyon on the right (NW) (at elevation 4523T) signals the end of the Kayenta and the start of the Navajo. The canyon walls become more interesting. A hard-to-spot arch is hidden in the folds of the Navajo wall to the left.
The next side canyon to the left (S) (between elevations 5124T and 5013T) is a real gem. About an hour upcanyon two canyons that are a minute apart now come in on the left (LUC). The first canyon is short and comes in from the southeast. The second canyon (LKA Fox Canyon) (shown to the west of elevation 5009T) comes in from the west. Fox Canyon is the standard route out of Twentyfive Mile Wash to the Early Weed Bench trailhead. (Map Twenty.)
The exit route
Fifteen minutes past the mouth of Fox Canyon is a Glen Canyon National Recreation Area boundary sign. Exit the canyon to the right (N) as soon as you can (several options) once past the sign. The cross-country hop back to the trailhead has no reliable source of water. Load up before leaving Twentyfive Mile Wash. (3.5-5.0 hours.)
Note: Although a canyon system to the west of the exit route (at elevation 4652T) looks appealing on the map, it is brutal to negotiate; beaver ponds have turned it into a marshy, reed-and tamarisk-choked horror.
Work your way generally northwest over a neverending line of slickrock hills and dales to the foot of the Egypt escarpment. Follow the horse trail back to the trailhead. (2.5-4.0 hours.)
Early Weed Bench Road Section
Access to Hikes #15 through 18. 

Access is from the Hole-in-the-Rock road. 

MapsBasin Canyon, Big Hollow Wash, and Egypt.