meander shown on the map). Descend the dune to the Escalante River. There is good camping in the area. (2.5-3.5 hours.)
The exit route
Hike downcanyon along the right side of the river for a half hour. Locate the first break in the Wingate wall on the left (LDC)(SSE) side of the river at the top of a huge Chinle hill. Trudge up the hill and find a thin ledge that cuts left across the Wingate. (This bighorn trail is the descent route used in Hike #21. It is located a quarter mile east of elevation 5095T.) Make your way to the top of the Wingate and turn south.
Follow the rim of Escalante Canyon downcanyon to the first major side canyon you intersect (located one-half mile southeast of elevation 5222T). This is Fold Canyon (LKA). (2.0-3.0 hours.)
Across Fold Canyon
Follow the north rim of Fold Canyon northeast for several miles along pleasant Wingate slickrock until you intersect a long side canyon that comes in from the north (shown a quarter mile west of elevation 5254T on the Stevens Canyon North map) . A couple of hundred yards before the mouth of the long side canyon locate a hole or slot that leads down the Wingate cliff into Fold Canyon (Class 5.0, 30'). This will take some scouting. Good camping and large potholes are in the canyon. (2.5-3.5 hours.)
To the Escalante escarpment
Walk downcanyon for about twenty minutes and exit the canyon to the south at the first break in the canyon wall (northeast of elevation 5355T). Cross a sand slide and follow the south rim of Fold Canyon southwest. You will end up on a point high above the Escalante River. The sharp bend in the river formed by the point was named the Swan Neck Bend by uranium miners. (The bend is mentioned in Hike #22.) (You leave the Stevens Canyon North map, cross a corner of the Scorpion Gulch map, and end up on the King Mesa map. The Swan Neck Bend is one-half mile southwest of elevation 4795.) (2.5-3.5 hours.)
The Overland RouteFold Canyon to the Fortymile Ridge Trailhead
Sandwiched between Fold Canyon to the west and Stevens Canyon to the east are four indescribably beautiful and remote canyons. The route into these canyons from the confluence of Fold Canyon and the escarpment that overlooks the Escalante River is to