it gets deeper, it features several small linear sandstone ridges. To the left (N) of the main fork, near the river, are the dark red walls of the north fork of Fence Canyon. The two forks join at the point of a wide "Vee." The trail follows the left (LDC)(N) side of the main fork of Fence Canyon until near the point of the "Vee " The trail is not maintained and is often hard to locate as you cross the plain. If you do lose it, do not worry. You know where you are headed.
Near the point of the "Vee" you will intersect a well-defined and heavily cairned trail. It follows the north rim of the main canyon and includes a stretch of an old cattle trail as it drops off the point. A short stroll takes you down to the Escalante River. You have descended the Navajo and Kayenta formations and are now in Wingate Sandstone. There is fair camping in the area. Better camping can be found a quarter mile down the Escalante River on the right. (2.0-3.0 hours.)
Historical note: A couple of hitching posts and a small concrete foundation near the river are all that remain of a line shack that was burned to the ground in April 1990 by an arsonist. On the same day this line shack flared, another one at the mouth of Silver Falls Creek was torched. Twenty-one head of cattle were killed a short distance upriver. Although a $10,000 reward was posted, the perpetrators were never found.
To the Overland Route: To intersect the section of the Overland Route that runs between Choprock Canyon and Twentyfive Mile Wash, cross the Escalante River and hike east to the base of the Wingate wall. Follow it upcanyon (N) for several minutes to the dilapidated remains of a pole corral that uses the Wingate cliff as one wall. Ascend a moderate (Class 3 +) slab behind the corral to the top of the Wingate. Follow it downcanyon. (Do not go too far above the Wingate or you may intersect a horse trail that will take you to the wrong place.) See the Overland Route description for details on getting into Neon Canyon, the first side canyon to the south.
Down the Escalante River to Neon Canyon
Start wading immediately. The first side canyon on the left (NE) is Neon Canyon, named for its shimmering, iridescently varnished walls. (Neon Canyon is not named on the map. It is shown to the west of elevation 5270T.) (1.0-1.5 hours.)
To Ringtail Canyon
Hike downriver from the mouth of Neon Canyon. The first canyon encountered on the left (NE) is Ringtail Canyon (AN). (Ringtail Canyon is not named on the map. It is shown to the northwest of elevation 4988T.) (1.0-1.5 hours.)