dered on the east by the Henry Mountains Basin and on the west by the Kaiparowits Basin. The steep eastern side of the upwarp is the Waterpocket Fold. The upwarp recedes from its greatest height in the north under the Aquarius Plateau to its lowest point at Lake Powell to the south. Evidence of this structural relief can be seen by noting that Navajo Sandstone is present near the 9,000' level on the Aquarius Plateau and below the 4,000' level at Lake Powell.
Twenty-five million years ago volcanic activity in the form of lava flows on the Aquarius Plateau added another element to the geology we see today. Lava boulders, brought into the Escalante River Basin by the action of glaciers and running water in the last two million years, are strewn throughout the upper Escalante canyons and can readily be seen in Death Hollow, Sand Creek, Steep Creek, The Gulch, and Boulder Creek.
Uplifting of the Colorado Plateau has continued intermittently since the Laramide Orogeny, and erosion has altered the Laramide topography so that the land surface no longer follows the structural relief. As the land rose, the highest points were most exposed to erosion. Younger rocks on the crest of the upwarp eroded away to the point that the region's oldest exposed rocks are found in the Circle Cliffs. On the Aquarius Plateau younger rocks were preserved by a resistant volcanic cap.
In the structurally low Kaiparowits Basin, the younger rocks were less exposed to erosion. These rocks are preserved in the Straight Cliffs, where they stand as high as the older rocks now at the surface on the crest of the deeply eroded upwarp. This inversion is shown on the topographic map. Why does ''Kaiparowits Basin" not appear? Because topographically the basin is really the lofty Kaiparowits Plateau. It still is a basin structurally: rocks of the same age are 8,000 feet lower in altitude on (or actually, under) the Kaiparowits Plateau than in the Circle Cliffs.
While the Colorado Plateau has risen, the land to the west has dropped. Once drainage was established, erosion rapidly cut into the western edge of the plateau and captured the upper course of the Colorado River. Following the path of least resistance as it flowed downward, water in the form of trickles, streams, and rivers remorselessly cut through hard and soft layers of rock to form the canyons we visit today.