can descend moderate slickrock southwest into lower Sleepy Hollow. You may find a short piece of constructed cattle trail near the bottom.
Digression: Lower Sleepy Hollow has a perennial flow of water. The upper reaches of the canyon are exceptional. A slot canyon that starts on King Mesa (between elevations 5112 and 5142) and ends at a fall in lower Sleepy Hollow has been named the Big Tony Fork of Sleepy Hollow. Tony Merten died on his farm in New Mexico in February 1996. His gargantuan size, unlimited physical strength, and unbridled persona perfectly match this slot canyon's character. With his wild red-blond hair and beard, Tony was instantly recognizable to all who encountered him in the canyons or along the windswept desert slickrock he loved so much and worked so hard to preserve. Perhaps all who pass will pay silent homage to Big Tony and to others who have cared about canyon country but can no longer be here to enjoy and be enthralled by it.
Hike down lower Sleepy Hollow to Coyote Gulch. (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Down Coyote Gulch
Now use the route description in Hike #20 for details on going down Coyote Gulch and exiting the canyon at Jacob Hamblin Arch. Once you are on top of the Navajo above the arch, cut east-southeast back to the Fortymile Ridge trailhead. (3.5-4.5 hours.)
Stevens and Fold CanyonsHike #22 
Season:
Spring until mid-May or fall after mid-September. Due to a lack of water along several sections of this hike, do not attempt it during periods of hot weather or an extended drought.
Time:
29.0 to 41.5 hours. Five to seven days.
Water:
Water can be a major problem on this trip. Recent rains will ensure that potholes are full. Read the text carefully about water sources and carefully assess current conditions before embarking on the trip.
Elevation range:
3700' to 5640'.
Maps:
King Mesa, Stevens Canyon South, Stevens Canyon North, and Scorpion Gulch.
Skill level:
Very difficult route finding. Class 5.0 rock climbing. The leader must be experienced with belay techniques and be capable of leading the climbing sections without protection. Some wading. This route is