Peek-a-boo Gulch, crosses a small ridge, and descends Spooky Gulch.
To Peek-a-boo Gulch
(Big Hollow Wash map and Map Twenty-one.) From the trailhead look north-northeast. Dry Fork Coyote is below you. On the far side of the canyon you will see one large vertical wall. To its right is a short narrow gap. This is Peek-a-boo Gulch. (Peek-a-boo Gulch is not labeled on the map. It is located to the east of elevation 4988.) A cairned trail takes you north down the initial cliff band and a small drainage that ends on the right side of a sand dune. Do not skirt along the top of the dune. Instead, descend straight down into a small canyon that leads to Dry Fork Coyote. Multiple trails are a problem in this area. Keep on the trail and off the sand dune.
The slots
Ascend a row of recently and needlessly carved steps into Peeka-boo Gulch. Two sets of natural bridges, one large, the other small, are a major attraction for photographers. Small challenges lie ahead. One short section of slot is too tight to squeeze through. Exit the slot, walk the rim for a short distance, then drop back into the slot. It ends in a wash just about the time you are getting warmed up.
Cut due east across a low ridge for ten minutes (many options) to Spooky Gulch, which starts as the first wide sandy wash you intersect. (Spooky Gulch is not labeled on the map. It is located to the west of elevation 4970.) Proceed downcanyon. The wide wash quickly narrows and the fun begins. Tight slots, short drops, and a route through a chockstone jungle are a delight. The slot ends and a short walk down the wash leads back to Dry Fork Coyote.
Digression: Brimstone Gulch is a short distance down Dry Fork Coyote and is worth exploring. Hike downcanyon along the wide, sandy wash. The canyon narrows and a large chockstone blocks the way. Pass it on the right (Class 5.0, 10'). The canyon again opens. A curtain of white guano marks a large bird nest on the right-hand wall. Brimstone Gulch enters from the left (N) shortly past the bird nest.
Though wide and sandy at its mouth, Brimstone Gulch narrows into a spectacular slot. Squeeze your way up as far as you are comfortable. You cannot make it all the way through. When you return to Dry Fork Coyote, you can walk downcanyon for a couple of minutes to a slickrock slab on the right (SW). It leads to the rim of the canyon, which you can follow back to the trailhead.
To the trailhead
Hike up Dry Fork Coyote to the mouth of Peek-a-boo Gulch. You are in a broad sandy area. Look west. A narrow opening marks