squeeze through it, it is not a slot canyon. The point is moot and not worth further discussion.
Perhaps the worst adventure a technical canyoneer can have is to drop into a canyon and be unable to continue down or climb back up. This does happen, and lives have been lost.
The most terrifying moment I had as a novice slot canyoneer was in the San Rafael Swell. I came to a deep pothole that appeared dry. It looked as though I would be able to climb back out of the pothole without much problem if the canyon below proved too difficult. I jumped down, only to find myself swimming; a fine dusting of sand covered the water, making the pothole look dry. Fortunately, I had a knife in my pocket and, after considerable effort, I was able to carve a couple of small handholds in the soft sandstone and extricate myself. I learned one of the basic lessons of technical canyoneering: you must always be prepared and able to reverse the route or escape the canyon.
Reversibility is the first option you should consider before heading down a canyon you have not been through before. Make sure you can climb up every drop you descend, or leave a rope at each drop. If the canyon proves too difficult, you can use mechanical ascenders or prussik knots to climb up the ropes.
If there are multiple drops, you may have to leave a lot of rope behind. I have been through canyons where we left a dozen or more ropes. After making it through the canyon, you can go through again and retrieve your ropes or rappel into the canyon, pull the ropes, and jumar out. Either method is time consuming, but that is the price one must pay for being a safe technical canyoneer.
Escapability means that there are breaks in the canyon walls that you can use to ascend to the rim. These include steep gullies, walls, and cracks that are easy to climb using standard rock-climbing techniques and equipment. Before descending a new canyon my partners and I spend considerable time walking the rim looking for such breaks. Often we will rappel into a canyon to see what it looks like. If the canyon looks exceptionally difficult, we hang ropes from the rim at strategic places to use for escape.
The primary reason the technical canyoneer must be familiar with the concepts of escapability and reversability is to be prepared if the canyon turns out to be more difficult than expected. Also, canyoneers must be ready for unanticipated conditions. These can take several forms: the conditions in the canyon are different from what was expected (e.g., high water, unexpected rock fall, flash flood, anchors have disappeared), equipment proves inadequate, or an injury necessitates evacuation.
A group of novice canyoneers found themselves in a difficult sit-