Little Death Hollow and Wolverine CreekHike #33
Season:
Spring or fall. Recent rains can make Little Death Hollow a chore to descend.
Time:
8.0 to 11.5 hours. This can be done as a very long dayhike or a moderate two-day hike.
Water:
Water availability is a moderate problem on this hike. Water is procurable at the confluence of Horse Canyon and Little Death Hollow. Medium potholes may be found in middle and lower Little Death Hollow and in lower Wolverine Creek.
Elevation range:
4950' to 5600'.
Maps:
Pioneer Mesa, Silver Falls Bench, Red Breaks, and King Bench.
Skill level:
Moderate route finding. Class 5.0 climbing with exposure. The leader must be experienced with belay techniques and be capable of leading the climbing sections without protection. Some wading. This is a moderate hike. If you do this as an overnight hike, familiarity with low-impact camping techniques is essential.
Special equipment:
Wading shoes or boots. A forty-foot rope is necessary. Each member of the party should have the capacity to carry at least six quarts of water.
Land status:
This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
When I was young, my father and I would go on long cross-country backpacking trips. Often, when the choice of a route was between a lower easier path or a higher, more difficult, and perhaps slightly technical and exposed passage, I would lobby for the latter. Dad would then call out his favorite saying: "Terra firmathe more the firma, the less the terra," and we would follow the easier track. Little Death Hollow, a superb and marginally technical slot canyon, can be taken at several levels. Any way you do it is engaging and enjoyable. Wolverine Creek Canyon is rarely talked about, which is unfortunate. It is a fine Wingate-walled defile.
The route starts on the Wolverine Loop road and goes down Little Death Hollow to Horse Canyon. Wolverine Creek is followed back to the trailhead.
Down Little Death Hollow
(Pioneer Mesa map and Map Forty-four.) From the corral follow a track southwest. The upper part of Little Death Hollow is