only short stretches of the route and are designed to help locate the harder-to-find canyon exits, entrances, and water sources. It is up to you to fill in the missing pieces, which usually consist of long stretches of straight-ahead hiking where the likelihood of getting lost is reduced. Some may wish to pencil in the whole route on their maps before the start of the trip.
Water: Water should always be on your mind when hiking in the desert. Always carry enough water to get back to a known source. During periods of hot weather start hiking at first light, take a midday break, and resume hiking in the cool hours of the evening. In hot weather, water requirements go up; two gallons over a twelve-hour period may be realistic. The prophylactic use of electrolyte-replacement drinks like ERG and Gatorade is recommended. Those coming from cooler climates can take up to ten days to acclimate to the heat and should take it easy for the first few days. Alcohol and caffeine are diuretics and promote dehydration. Water loading, the intake of several quarts of water before you start to hike in the morning, works well and can reduce the amount of water you need to carry on your back.
Water sources, either springs or potholes, are described in the text and on the maps as small, medium, or large. This does not refer to their physical size but to the likelihood of finding water in them during the recommended hiking seasons. These descriptions are subjective and should not be taken as gospel. Small means the water source may dry up within days of a rain. Medium potholes should hold water for a week or two after a rain, and a medium spring runs most of the time but will dry up after long periods without moisture. Large potholes will be full even a month after a rain. Large springs will dry up only after prolonged drought.
Springs and potholes are shown on the maps and are described using abbreviations. A large spring or pothole is marked as lsg or lph. A medium spring or pothole is marked as msg or mph. A small spring or pothole is marked as ssg or sph.
All water should be treated or filtered, without exception. Giardia is a hard-shelled protozoan that can cause no end of bowel distress if you should happen to "get the bug." The latest medical research has shown that there are several effective methods for eradicating the pest:
Heat your water. Giardia, bacteria, and viruses are killed at a temperature of about 150 degrees. You just need to bring the water to a boil; you do not have to keep boiling it.
Use iodine. The 2 percent tincture of iodine liquid available at the grocery store works well. Use five drops per quart if the water is clear; use ten drops per quart if the water is cloudy. If the water is over 68 degrees, let it sit for thirty minutes before drinking. The