are in the Carmel Formation. They are topped by a short red Entrada Sandstone cliff.
3.8
Old wood rip-gut fence to the right. These are also called buck, or stake and rider, fences.
6.5
Down a narrow side-cut on a hill.
6.6
Across the head of a small canyon that is to the right (S). This is the first canyon head you will cross (shown to the east of elevation 5320.)
7.9
(Egypt map.) Across the head of a canyon that is to the right (SE). This is the second canyon head you will cross (shown onequarter mile southeast of elevation 5483T). A large slickrock sheet at the head of the canyon provides a place to park. The road ahead gets rougher. (The Egypt road is shown on this map.)
8.8
At the top of a small rise. An incongruous, bottom-heavy, white pinnacle is visible on a red hillside to the left (NW). Go down a gentle hill.
8.9
Bottom of the hill. The top of Egypt 3, the third canyon head you pass, is on the right (SE). It presents itself as a rock-strewn gully.
9.0
Start of Egypt 3The Slot Hike #12. At a silver culvert that goes under the road. A vague track on the left provides parking. You are a quarter mile west-southwest of elevation 5651T and are in the Carmel Formation.
9.4
"Y." Go right (E). The road to the left goes to the start of Hike #13.
Side road to Lower Harris Wash Hike #13
0.0
At the "Y." Go left (N).
1.1
Start of Lower Harris Wash Hike #13. Stock pond on the right (NE). There is no trail register, though you can register at the Egypt trailhead. The stock pond is shown to the west-northwest of elevation 5735T. You are in the Carmel Formation. Although this is the start of the hike, keep driving!
1.8
Deep gorge to the right (N) (shown to the east of elevation 5921T). You will hike along its right side at the start of Hike #13. Now that you have seen part of the route, return to the stock pond.
Historical note: Allen Dump, the high area to the west of the stock pond, was named for the Philo Allen family. Allen is credited with bringing the first cattle into the area in 1875. Before moving his family to Utah and to Escalante, he was a bodyguard to the Mormon prophet Joseph Smith.
End Of Side Road