I 

Box-Death Hollow Wilderness
The Box-Death Hollow area is located in the northwest corner of the Escalante drainage. It is bounded by Pine Creek on the west, the Aquarius Plateau and Boulder Mountain on the north, Highway 12 on the east, and the Escalante River on the south. Three major canyons cut through Box-Death Hollow: Pine Creek, Death Hollow, and Sand Creek. They all start in sub-alpine meadows and ponderosa pine and Douglas fir forests near the 9,000-foot level on Boulder Mountain and drop 2,500 feet over the course of many spectacular miles, ending at the Escalante River.
Those intervening miles contain some of the finest scenery in the region and are replete with ponderous, sheer-walled, flat bottomed canyons, challenging narrows, iridescent pools, and idyllic campsites. While Pine Creek is an easy hike, both Death Hollow and Sand Creek are two of the most difficult hikes in the guide. The Boulder Mail Trail (BMT), an old pack trail, cuts through the area laterally. One of the few established trails in the Escalante area, the BMT allows one to sample the region and its hidden recesses.
The earliest arrivals in the Box Death Hollow area were Fremont Indians during the late Basketmaker II Period (about A.D. 500). Evidenceprimarily rock art panels and pithouses-shows that they stayed near the present-day town of Escalante and along the Escalante River.
The Box-Death Hollow area was heavily used by Anasazi Indians during the Pueblo II and III periods (A.D. 900 to 1275). From their large base at what is now the Coombs site in the town of Boulder, the Anasazi fanned out to exploit resources on both the benches and in the canyons. Lithic scatters, granaries, and several cliff dwellings provide evidence of their passage.
The first white men to explore the Aquarius Plateau and Boulder Mountain were members of the St. George militia. They went up Pine Creek and ascended Boulder Mountain's west side in 1866. In 1872 Almon H. Thompson and Frederick Dellenbaugh of the second Powell survey traversed the Aquarius Plateau while searching for the Dirty Devil River. Thompson, impressed by the number of lakes on the plateau, is credited with naming the Aquarius for the waterbearer of the Zodiac. Mormon settlers, not aware of Thomp-