The Art of Travel
Our thighs were of marble, our kneecaps were missing, our calves were like rain-shrunk clothesline: we had spent two days working our way down the wrong canyon.

Bruce Berger, 1990
For those not familiar with desert travel, some advice is in order. The suggestions below do not include everything you need to know about hiking in the desert. They should be added to skills already attained in the woods or mountains.
Leave a complete and detailed itinerary with someone reliable. If you do not know anyone trustworthy, staple or tape your itinerary to your permit before you drop it into the trail register box. Better yet, get your hiking permit at the Interagency Office in Escalante. This gives personnel there a chance to discuss your proposed route. If you are reported missing, the first thing rangers check are the office permits. If the information is not there, they have to drive from one trailhead to the next, looking for your car or permit, a time-consuming proposition.
Those waiting for hikers to return home should realize that it is not uncommon for a hike to take longer than expected. Also, access roads that were initially dry and passable can be impossible to negotiate after heavy rains, leaving hikers stranded at a trailhead for a day or two.
Always carry the appropriate 7.5 series USGS topographic maps. Keep track of where you are on the map at all times. It is surprising how easy it is to get mixed up in a maze of canyons, washes, draws, and slots.
Watch your backtrail (Louis L'Amour rule 1; Star Trek rule 91). As you hike along keep an eye on where you have been by noting prominent landforms such as towers and pinnacles. This will help if you have to backtrack your route.
On steep slabs, stay on your feet and keep your weight over them. Your shoe soles have more friction than your britches!
When going down especially steep rock, pick a route that contains popstops. These are depressions, small ledges, trees, or bushes that will stop you if you should slip and start sliding.
Use a belay or a handline in any situation where a fall resulting in injury is possible. If an accident should happen, it may take several days for members of your group to make their way back to a trailhead and notify the sheriff in Escalante (call 911 or notify the Interagency Office). It may then take a couple of additional days for a