This dune, locally known as the Upper Sand Slide, was part of a historic trail and is used as the exit route. The Lower Sand Slide exit route is presented as an Alternate route below.
Exit Escalante Canyon via the Upper Sand Slide
Sweat up the dune and exit at its highest point.
Historical note: Before topping the dune, look 150 yards to the left (E). You will see the original wagon trail cutting along a wall. The last eight feet, now a vertical wall, was once filled with riprap. Near the drop are extensive cowboy glyphs dating from 1902. Walk west over a rise. Before you (W) is a large, pink, pointed
dome (elevation 5932). To its right (N) is a smaller dome, and to its right a larger dome (elevation 5543). Go to a pass between the pink, pointed dome and the smaller dome. Drop southwest into a southwest-running drainage that cuts between several large domes (elevations 5932 and 5981). (1.0-1.5 hours.)
To the trailhead
Hike up the southwest-running drainage. It contains a string of medium potholes and there is good camping in the area. This short drainage passes through the large domes and fizzles in the sand. You are now on a plain that gently rises to the west-northwest. On either side are lines of Navajo domes.
Head west-northwest up the plain between the cliffs for a couple of miles. Your goal is to intersect the Old Sheffield road. (It is labeled on the map.) You will not miss it. Now join the last part of Part 1 and return to the trailhead. (3.0-4.0 hours.)
Alternate route: From the base of the Upper Sand Slide go downriver for a half hour. A huge pasture on the right (at elevation 4760) with a short steep-walled side canyon on its west side is Sheffield's Bend, the site of the Sheffield cabin. The cabin's chimney, which is all that remains, is located near the mouth of the side canyon next to a large reed-lined spring. At the back of the canyon a long, worn row of Moqui steps leads up a steep prow that divides Sheffield's Alcove. Fun to view from a distance, the steps are too steep to climb.
Historical note: Sam Sheffield moved from Colorado to Boulder in 1889. He is credited as being the first white man to plant corn in Boulder Valley and with discovering the Coombs site. It is unclear when Sheffield built the cabin. In 1895 Sam Sheffield's sister Josepha, her husband Cal Gresham, and their four children lived on the bend.