you will be forced onto a three-to five-foot-wide ledge. The ledge cuts horizontally across the face of the cliff for 200 yards and ends at the top of a slope leading out to the promontory. It is best to scout the route without a pack. Search carefully, as the ledge looks like it peters out in several places. (If you go too high, you will find yourself on a-wide ledge below a Navajo cliff and you will walk above the desired ledge system.)
Warning: The ledge is not technically difficult (Class 3 +), but it is very scary. Belays can be utilized. In one place packs should be lowered to assure that hikers are not accidentally launched off the ledge.
Once on the promontory, descend a steep slope to the north and go down a shallow drainage to the Escalante River. There is good camping on a broad sandy beach across the river. The beach is in the Chinle Formation. (2.0-4.0 hours.)
Exit the Escalante
Hike north up the west side of the Escalante River (no wading) for twenty minutes to the base of a cliff dune that drops east through the Kayenta, Wingate, and Chinle formations. This is the only sand dune in the vicinity. (The cliff dune is south of an abandoned meander shown as 2-255.) Ascend the dune to the west. Near the top, find a cattle trail (LKA the Scorpion Horse Trail) going up the Kayenta to the south. Note the brush fence at the top. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
The Scorpion Horse Trail turns northwest at the brush fence. You will leave the trail here. Go generally south on a wide Kayenta bench, cross a couple of small canyons, and head others. After forty-five minutes the trail goes under the back of a larger canyon that has two distinct alcoves. Past this the trail crosses a wide plain in front of another side canyon. The Kayenta ledge narrows considerably and you will see a Navajo dome toward the end of a ridge on the right (LDC). This is the first break in the Navajo wall and it is the exit route. (If you go too far, the trail turns sharply south at a corner and goes toward the back of a long side canyon or bay.) (The ridge is shown one-quarter mile east-northeast of elevation 5120T and just northwest of a marked 4600-foot contour line.)
Climb up the Kayenta (Class 4, haul packs) and locate a pour-off between the Navajo wall and the Navajo dome. Ascend a crack on the right side of the pour-off (Class 5.2, 10' of climbing, 25' of exposure, belay and haul packs). Follow the drainage up for 100 yards until it divides. Go west up the prow between drainages and work southwest until you are between two squat, elongated, Carmel-topped domes. The dome to the left is flat-topped; the dome to the