uation while trying to descend a slot canyon near Zion National Park. After entering the canyon and descending a couple of small drops, they encountered brutal conditions that were not expected. Escape routes were available and reversing the route was an option. The leaders, though, were apparently unfamiliar with the concepts of reversibility and escapability. Feeling they had no choice, the group continued downcanyon. Two of the trip members died. The others waited in the cold dark canyon for five days for a rescue.
Many years ago, I was with a group that was descending a technical slot in the White Canyon area. We reached a pour-off we could not climb back up. One of the new members of the team rappelled the pour-off with instructions to hike downcanyon and see if there was an escape route. We did not want to leave a rope at the drop if it was not necessary. A half hour later he returned and called up from below that there was an exit a short distance downcanyon. We all rappelled the drop and pulled the rope. As we walked downcanyon I asked him to show me the escape route. He pointed at a moderate slab. I suggested we walk to the far side of the canyon. What he had not been able to see from the canyon floor was that the moderate slab was topped by a featureless vertical cliff.
The group was now in trouble. As we worked our way downcanyon we all sweated the possibility that we were trapped. Luck was with us, however; we were able to complete the descent and an important lesson had been learned.
Statistically, the single most dangerous procedure a rock climber undertakes is the non-belayed rappel. A life dangles from the rope's anchors and often in canyoneering the anchors are ''manky." Novice canyoneers often dismiss rappelling. After all, it seems easy to slide down a rope. It is simple until something goes wrong. Experienced rock climbers and mountaineers have been injured or killed on "simple" rappels. Letting your guard down can prove catastrophic. It is imperative that technical slot canyoneers know how to properly set up rappels, rappel over knots, deal with clothing caught in a rappel device, and ascend ropes using prussik knots or mechanical ascenders.
We use a technique called "LAMAR," or "Last Man At Risk," on most downclimbs and rappels. All but the last climber are belayed. Once the first climbers are down, they pull together on the rope from below to check anchors. The last man then rappels.
Substandard anchor placements are common in slots. It is essential that you back up and equalize anchors. On several occasions we have had "bombproof" chockstones "explode" after they were weighted.
Be exceptionally careful to rig your anchor so the ropes will pull