The last big snows usually arrive during this month and can leave you stranded at the trailhead. There are few other hikers about.
March: The first glimmer of spring is tempered with unsettled weather and the chance for snow and rain. Temperatures vary from below freezing to eighty degrees. Trailhead access can be a problem. Spring break ushers in an influx of college students. The canyons start to get busy.
April: Spring is here and flowers start to bloom. Rain and high winds are common. Temperatures vary from freezing to ninety degrees. This is the most popular month for backpacking in the Escalante.
May: Spring flowers are in full bloom. This is the month the winds never seem to die. Plan on temperatures from just above freezing to 100 degrees by the end of the month. Short rains, and snow at higher elevations, are possible. Gnats, mosquitos, and biting flies along watercourses can be a nuisance.
Summer
June, July, andAugust: Summer is in full force. Bugs, temperatures over 100 degrees, and little moisture make it imperative that you select a hike with care. This is the time to explore the well-watered canyons and to avoid the routes that have long stretches of slickrock or bench walking. The rainy season starts in mid-July and lasts through September. Expect short intense rain-and windstorms. Flash floods are common.
Fall
September: August rains have reinvigorated the desert and the fall bloom has started; but temperatures are still hot, ranging from fifty to 100 degrees. Although the weather is usually stable, short intense rains and flash floods are common.
October and November: Nighttime temperatures start to drop as the season progresses and the days become shorter. Plan on a gamut of extremes from twenty to ninety degrees. Leaves are changing and the canyons are awash in color. This is my favorite time in the desert. Water is usually plentiful and the crispness of the nights is invigorating.
Winter
December to mid-February: Expect snowstorms and nighttime temperatures below zero degrees. The short days and fourteen-hour nights can be a trial, but you will see few hikers. Water is rarely a problem, making this a favored time to explore benchlands and normally dry canyons.
Roads have to be a consideration in winter. When snowcovered, they can be dangerous. When the days warm up, the roads turn into a slick clay and even 4WDs will have problems.
Flash floods occur in all of the canyons detailed in the guide. This becomes apparent when you see logs jammed well above the