tighter and more difficult below. Now the canyon alternates between slots and sandy sections. Escapes from the canyon are manifold.
The ultra narrows are very long and incredibly tight. At the end of this section a small gully on the right provides egress from the canyon, if needed. Below, negotiate several large pools directly or, in every case, pass them on the right. The route ends at a high drop in the slot. You cannot continue past this point. (You are at about the "e" in Brimstone on the Big Hollow Wash map.) (3.0-4.0 hours.)
To the trailhead
Backtrack for several minutes to the first possible exit on the right (LUC)(E). Hike generally north through mesmerizing slickrock domes, heading or crossing small canyons as needed. Eventually you will be forced to the rim of the canyon. Keep a sharp eye out for an arch near the rim. (It is located one-quarter mile west-northwest of elevation 5283T on the Egypt map.) Near the head of the canyon you will intersect the track you started on. Follow it back over the head of Brimstone Gulch to the trailhead. (2.0-3.0 hours.)
Digression: The enthusiastic explorer can combine Brimstone, Spooky, and Peek-a-boo gulches into a slot canyon tour de force. Instead of exiting Brimstone Gulch on the left (LDC)(E), find a route out on the right (LDC)(W). Hike west over a rise into Spooky Gulch, the first canyon you encounter. It is a wide wash at this point. Now follow the directions in Hike #16. Peek-a-boo Gulch takes you back to the top of Early Weed Bench.
Scorpion Gulch and the Scorpion Horse TrailHike #18 
Season:
Spring or fall. Due to a long, dry cross-country stretch, do not attempt this route in the summer or during periods of hot weather.
Time:
15.0 to 20.0 hours. This is a very long two-day hike. Three or four days are recommended.
Water:
Water availability is a problem on this route. The Escalante River has a perennial flow of water. Scorpion Gulch has large springs. The cross-country route back to the trailhead is dry. One dry camp is recommended.
Elevation range:
4200' to 5400'.
Maps:
Egypt and Scorpion Gulch. If you plan to do the rock climber's route, add the Stevens Canyon North map.