Difficulties continue until you reach a series of beaver dams. (The dams start just as Death Hollow goes off the Roger Peak map onto the Escalante map.) The dams mark the end of the narrows and the beginning of the perennial flow of water in Death Hollow. (2.0-3.5 hours.)
The canyon opens
The character of the canyon changes dramatically and the way is lined with ponderosa pine, dogwood, birch, ferns, and flowers. Halloween walls, formed when bright orange iron seeps flow into the stream, provide sharp contrast to the green foliage and the white Navajo walls. A sulphur spring (shown on the map) trickles from a side canyon to the left (N). Its presence will be apparent to the nose. Thick stands of poison ivy prove irksome. Large groups will find few adequate campsites, though small parties can find nooks and crannies that will suffice.
The next landmark is a narrow side canyon that comes in on the right (W). It has a large ponderosa pine laying against its left wall 100 yards up from the confluence and the canyon is blocked by a pour-off after another 100 yards. There is fine camping suitable for large groups above the pour-off, which can be passed via a steep hill on the right (LUC). (The side canyon is the only canyon dropping from the west between "Death" and "Hollow" on the map.) (3.0-5.0 hours.)
Digression: The side canyon is Moonshadow Canyon (AN). Huge potholes, some up to twenty-five yards across, line its slickrock floor. Above the campsite pass a fall by ascending a steep gully that cuts behind two abandoned meanders on the left (SW). It is easy to spend a day, or moonlit night, exploring this splendid canyon.
To the BMT
The BMT is tricky to find, so pay close attention to the map and to landmarks if you plan to exit there. Two hours of pleasant wading down the creek, past several large caves on the left wall, lead to a thin sandy campsite on the right that is partially tucked under a small overhang. Just past it, again on the right and a foot or two above stream level, is a fast-flowing spring that squirts vertically from the ground. (2.5-3.0 hours.) (Map Three.)
Historical note: Shortly after World War II, Mac LeFevre, a rancher living on Salt Gulch near Boulder, carried a milk can full of trout across the BMT and released them at the squirter spring, stocking an otherwise fishless stream.
Digression: The east section of the BMT, which leads to the Boul-