named the narrow gorge Hidden Passage Canyon. Cid Ricketts Sumner wrote of the canyon: "Hidden Passageit was well named. I could not make it stand forth to be seen . . . I looked ahead to where both walls drew in upon each other, curving away into what must be yet another mighty coil beyond my sight, and walked slowly on."
Explorer Weldon Heald noted, "what I will always remember about Hidden Passage is the upper waterfall at the head of the Canyon. There the corridor widens out into a vaulted hall at the head of which a slender thread of water falls into a clear pool. From the twilit room we looked up to the overhanging walls far above us, enclosing a narrow slit of sky between."
To Reflection Canyon
Walk along the cattle trail to the top of Reflection Canyon, the next canyon to the north. There is no easy access into Reflection Canyon. (1.0 hour.)
Rock climber's note: There is very difficult and dangerous access into Reflection Canyon via a steep row of Moqui steps located to the south of elevation 3978AT (Class 5.6, 60', no protection possible).
Continue north, pass a jutting fin of Entrada Sandstone that comes down from Sixty Point (at elevation 4418), and follow a cattle trail along the base of the cliffs back to the trailhead. (2.5-3.5 hours.)
Digression: This does not have to be the end of the trip. See Hike #27 for details on exploring Cottonwood and Llewellyn gulches, the next two canyons north of Reflection Canyon.
Llewellyn and Cottonwood GulchesHike #27
Season:
Spring or fall.
Time:
14.5 to 21.5 hours. Three to four days.
Water:
Water availability is a problem on this route. Lower Llewellyn and Cottonwood gulches have large springs.
Elevation range:
3700' to 4550'.
Maps:
Davis Gulch and Nasja Mesa.
Skill level:
Difficult route finding. Class 5.4 climbing. The leader must be experienced with belay techniques and be capable of leading the climbing sections without protection. There is some exposure on this route and long distances between water sources. This is a moderately