you out of serious trouble. Exercise caution before entering this remote country. A lack of water, difficult route finding, hazardous rock climbing, and long distances over rugged country make this area suitable only for hardcore canyoneers who are rock climbers. To explore the whole area takes fifteen to twenty days.
Water is a major concern in this area. Since most of the routes into the canyons cross vast areas of Navajo Sandstone which contain innumerable potholes, travel to these canyons should be limited to times following recent rains. Do not attempt to enter this area during periods of hot weather or drought. Early spring or late fall are the recommended seasons.
The maps you need to explore the entire area are King Mesa, Stevens Canyon South, Stevens Canyon North, The Rincon NE, and Davis Gulch.
There are two access routes to these canyons. One is via a difficult climb using a row of worn Moqui steps (Class 5.6, 90') located a quarter mile up the first side canyon in Stevens Canyon. (The side canyon is shown to the north of elevation 4819T on the Stevens Canyon South map.)
The second route is via the Baker Trail (described in Hike #21). It takes you out of middle Stevens Canyon to the crest of the Waterpocket Fold.
Rose Canyon
Rose Canyon, named for the profusion of cliff roses found in this delightful canyon, lies between Stevens and Cow canyons. (Rose Canyon is not named on the map. It starts just south of elevation 5017T on the Stevens Canyon South map.) Access to the canyon is easy throughout its length; breaks in its rounded Navajo walls are numerous. Huge potholes are scattered throughout the canyon.
Cow and Fence canyons
There is only one way to get into Cow and Fence canyons, and it is a bear. The route is for a team of three or more. One must be an accomplished rock climber; two are needed for a shoulder stand. The route enters the east fork of Cow Canyon between elevation 4626T and 2-315 on the Stevens Canyon South map and winds its way generally east down the Navajo. The crux of the route comes at the final drop, a series of worn Moqui steps descending, then crossing, a vertical fifteen-foot wall. Rappel anchors are nonexistent on the smooth slab above the drop. With a shoulder stand, the route into or out of the canyon is rated Class 5.9. Solo canyoneers cannot make this climb.
The east fork of Cow Canyon contains a fine stream. The west