der road, park off the track near the highway. Follow a track to the right (E). In short order the track descends a steep cliff. The way is easy to follow and ends at mile 73.1 on Highway 12. Plan on 1.5 to 2.0 hours one-way. This is a delightful and easy hike suitable for most.
69.8
Head of Rocks Scenic Overlook on the left. Great views.
70.5
Old Sheffield road to the right (SE). This road provides access to Hikes #7 through 9. See the Old Sheffield Road Section for details.
72.4
(Calf Creek map.) Across the Camel's Back (LKA).
73.6
Bowington Overlook to the left.
74.3
Cross the Escalante River on the Highway 12 bridge. There is parking and a trail register on the far (W) side of the bridge on the left.
Digression: Although no loop trips start at this trailhead, it is a popular starting point for visiting both upper and lower Escalante Canyon areas. There is private property both up-and downcanyon. For those going upcanyon, cross the river and follow its left (LUC) (S) side. It takes about an hour to reach the mouth of Sand Creek. For those going downcanyon, follow a trail under the Highway 12 bridge, cross a wood footbridge over Calf Creek, and hike along the left (LDC)(N) side of the river. "Trail Easement" signs lead you across private property. Please stay on the trail. It will take about an hour to reach the mouth of Phipps Wash, which comes in on the right (S). Hike #7 details Escalante Canyon below Phipps Wash.
75.1
Cross Calf Creek.
75.5
Signed Calf Creek Recreation Area to the left (W). This fee-foruse campground has outhouses, trash barrels, and drinking water. A campground host is available during the busy season.
Digression: A trail suitable for most people starts at the campground and follows Calf Creek upcanyon to the spectacular 126foot-high Lower Calf Creek Falls. This is the perfect and recommended hike for those who have little time to spend in the area. (2.5-4.5 hours round-trip.)
77.0 + 50 yards
Start Middle Boulder Creek Hike #5. There is parking before a barb-wire fence on the right (E). You are one-quarter mile north of the "h" in Bench and are in Navajo Sandstone. You are on Haymaker Bench, which was named for early rancher Charley Haymaker.
Digression: The Old Boulder road crosses this parking area and descends to the Escalante River. To follow it, go south through a wire gate. The old road goes generally south and is not too difficult to follow. It enters Escalante Canyon several hundred yards below