Introduction
The view to the south and southeast is dismal and suggestive of the terrible. It is almost unique even in the category of plateau scenery. The streams which head at the foot of the lava-cap on the southern wall of the Aquarius flow southward down its long slopes. The amphitheaters soon grow into canyons of profound depth and inaccessible walls. These passages open into a single trunk canyon, and their united waters form the Escalante River . . . . At no point can its walls be scaled.

Clarence Dutton, 1880
A recent acquaintance, hearing that I hiked in the desert, mentioned that he too liked hiking there. "It's level," he said. "To the contrary," I thought, thinking of a letter I'd received about a certain canyon: "Never have I hiked so much uphill as I did trying to get down the damn canyon'' my correspondent had written.
And therein lies the rub: the vast province called Escalante is not the seemingly flat plain familiar to so many as desert. It is a twisted, complex web of sandstone; a jigsaw puzzle of canyons, draws, defiles, gorges, slots, and washes that outline upland expanses of slickrock and soil, demarcate benches, mesas, and ridges, and delineate the towers, pinnacles, and peaks that stand above the rest.
The Escalante is a land of diversity, from the vivacious sub-alpine highlands of the Aquarius Plateau to the death-knell dryness of the lower desert. It has been called a lonely land, devoid of life, with little to recommend it. But that is a perception of those who have never hiked the desert skin or explored its underpinnings from the bottom of the abyss.
It is motion, the sine qua non of the desert, that precludes loneliness. Who cannot help but find joy in the changing shadows on a wall at first light, delight in the intensifying colors of slickrock and cloud as day turns to night, and relish in the swirl of water during a summer downpour or the quiet waters of a pothole under a scorching sun?
The purpose of Canyoneering 3: Loop Hikes in Utah's Escalante is to provide accurate information for those intent on discovering what this desert region has to offer. It is designed to be used by sightseers, photographers, dayhikers, backpackers, and rock climbers. Desert enthusiasts from youngsters to seniors will find hikes to fulfill their objectives.
In comparison with other hiking guides, the material presented in this guide may seem complex. The text does not simply lead you from signpost to signpost along oft-trodden paths. There are few established trails in the Escalante. Most of the routes described in this book entail finding ways in and out of canyons, and often they in-