Part 2: Continuing on down Coyote Gulch
(King Mesa map.) From Jacob Hamblin Arch continue downcanyon. The character of the canyon changes. The narrow canyon widens and the way is lined with a lush and varied plant community. An hour down, Coyote Natural Bridge spans the canyon. Its sixty-eight-foot opening allows effortless passage and is a highlight of the trip. (1.0 hour.)
Historical note: After walking through Coyote Natural Bridge, canyon explorer and environmental writer Edward Abbey wrote: "I walked under the bridge, feeling the sensuous pleasure of moving through a wall of stone, wading the stream that made the opening, standing in shadow and looking back at the upstream canyon bathed in morning light, the sparkling water, the varnished slickrock walls, the fresh cool green of the cottonwoods, the pink and violet plumes of tamarisk."
The ensuing stretch of canyon contains several short side canyons that are worth a visit. The next major attraction is Cliff Arch, located high on a wall to the left. Early visitors called it Jug Handle Arch. (1.0 hour.)
Downcanyon the character of Coyote Gulch again changes. The creek has cut through Navajo Sandstone and into the Kayenta Formation. This formation, consisting of alternating layers of sandstones, siltstones, and mudstones, erodes into ledges that waterfalls now plummet over.
The canyon becomes harder to negotiate. Water, just an idle relic above Cliff Arch, becomes the focal point below. Springs gush from the walls and hanging gardens with maidenhair ferns, monkeyflowers, grasses, and columbines dangle from the cliffs. During the colder months icefalls drop from high alcoves to the floor of the canyon. Route finding around a panoply of waterfalls is a minor problem.
Near the Crack-in-the-Wall exit Stevens Arch becomes visible in the distance. (Stevens Canyon South map.) The lower section of a large sand dune is visible to the right (S). This marks the exit. (If you go too far downcanyon, you will intersect a log ladder, then the Escalante River. Backtrack for ten minutes.) (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Historical note: Stevens Arch, the fifth-largest arch in canyon country, was named for Al Stevens, a rancher who used to run cattle in the area. Early cattlemen called it Stephen's Canyon Arch and river runner Harry Aleson noted it in his river logs as Sky Arch. Aleson wrote that it was "one spectacular bridge, with opening about 150 by 200 feet-the bridge hanging about 700 feet up in the canyon wall-blue sky filling the hondo-shaped opening. You will choke up with a feeling of beauty and awe when you first glimpse