Digression: There is a direct route from Twentyfive Mile Wash into Moody Creek. On your map, pinpoint an abandoned meander shown at elevation 4836T that is about a mile up Moody Creek from the Escalante River. Your goal is to make your way over the heads of several canyons and gain the rim of Moody Creek. Locate the abandoned meander and hike to its north side. Descend a maze of steep slickrock slabs, washes, and ridges and locate a low cliff. A fifteen-foot rappel with a large boulder for an anchor leads to the top of a slab. Steep rock (Class 5.0, 80') leads to the ground behind a tower in the middle of the abandoned meander. Circle it to the south, then east. A tight vertical slot (Class 5.2, 25') takes you into Moody Creek, which is followed downcanyon to the river. This route will take much scouting to find. (4.0-7.0 hours.)
Out of Escalante Canyon
Cross the river and hike upcanyon for a couple of hundred yards. A break in the wall to the left (LUC)(W) leads to a bench above the river. Follow the bench upcanyon until you are near the end of a point. Find a log and a row of Moqui steps in a crack that leads to the canyon rim (Class 5.4, 20'). (The steps are one-quarter mile northeast of elevation 4801T.) (1.0-1.5 hours.)
To Scorpion Gulch
Your goal is to head generally southeast far above the Escalante River across broken terrain to Scorpion Gulch. On your map find elevation 5048T, which is near the mouth of Scorpion Gulch. A short, steep canyon leads southwest from the west side of this elevation. Follow the canyon down into Scorpion Gulch. Large springs and good camping are in the area. If you do stay here, camp in the wash below the springs. (The springs are dry in the summer. Large springs appear a mile downcanyon.) (4.0-6.0 hours.)
The Overland RouteScorpion Gulch to Fold Canyon
Out of Scorpion Gulch
(Scorpion Gulch map.) Hike down Scorpion Gulch for a couple of minutes and gain the Kayenta on the right (LDC)(S). Run Kayenta ledges generally east-northeast along the south side of Scorpion Gulch. Turn a corner (past elevation 5058T). Follow the Kayenta generally east high above the Escalante River. The Kayenta ledges narrow. You will pick up the Scorpion Horse Trail as you walk along. (The horse trail is described in Hike #18.) Follow the horse trail along the Kayenta for about a half hour until you are above a huge sand dune (located to the southwest of 2-255, an abandoned