word meaning ''no one" or from Captain Nemo, who shunned humankind by disappearing under the sea in Jules Verne's Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea.
Bement Arch was locally called Nemo Arch or Gothic Arch. Harry Aleson suggested the name Everett Ruess Natural Window in 1950. Members of a National Geographic expedition in 1955 renamed it for Harlon W. Bement, the director of the Utah State Aeronautics Commission. Bement was an avid explorer of canyon country on both foot and from the air and is credited with discovering several arches. The USGS Board on Geographic Names was faced with the problem of officially naming the arch after Bement since he was still alive and landform names generally honor the dead.
To the cattle trail exit
Below Bement Arch a riparian habitat develops. A perennial flow of water and a string of beaver ponds hinders progress. There may be some wading, though indistinct trails do lead around most of the ponds.
A constructed cattle trail is used to exit the canyon. It is on the left and ascends the first easy break in the wall. (The trail goes between the "1" and the "c" in Gulch.) Scattered near the foot of the trail are pieces of a log fence. If you miss the trail, the walls again steepen and you will end up at Lake Powell. (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Historical note: The lower three miles of Davis Gulch, now under water, were strewn with Anasazi cliff dwellings and Fremont Culture pictographs. The flooding of Lake Powell destroyed these sites. Harry Aleson, in a letter to Stella Ruess, Everett Ruess's mother, described a trip into the canyon in May 1949 while looking for signs of the long-missing Everett. While there, Aleson stumbled onto a major cliff dwelling. Aleson reported that he "Climbed into the first large cave on Right (So. Exp.). This was an old Moki Cave for 20 or so families. Many shards, charcoal, metates, side by side in boulders, old maize cobs, 3 rock lookouts, remains of Moki House, 4 ft walls in placeWhite pigment paintings farthest to Eastward. To West, outside of main cave, & on lower level is a fine Moki Granary, stick, stone and mud. Door below it. No white man ever here?"
The cattle trail exit
The first portion of the cattle trail consists of a series of steps cut into the rock. After the initial rise, the trail follows the rim upcanyon for a couple of hundred yards; it then turns west and zigzags up a shallow slickrock drainage.
Historical note: This trail proved problematic to cattlemen. Rancher McKay Bailey is quoted as saying, "This spot is tricky. We had a horse do a two-and-a-half gainer off the cliff here, and once a pack mule landed in the cottonwood trees below."