Access
So now we come to Owl's house, as some of us have so many times before, searching for answers to questions of one sort or another Will we find the answers here?

The Tao of Pooh
The towns of Escalante and Boulder provide access to the canyons of the Escalante. Escalante is the larger of the two towns and offers basic services including several gas stations and auto repair shops, cafes, two small markets, and lodging that runs from primitive to elegant.
Perhaps the most important stop on your way through Escalante is Escalante Outfitters, the local hiking and fishing supply store. Located in a large log building on the north side of Highway 12 in the middle of town, the Outfitters has become an institution. Barry and Celeste Bernards can provide you with everything you forgot to bringor find that you needincluding stove-repair kits, Coleman fuel and bottled gas for backpack stoves, clothing, tarps, Tshirts, hats, caps, visors, and a thousand other items. Their selection of USGS topographic maps for canyon country is the best I have seen in Utah.
The Escalante Outfitters and Bunkhouse is a favorite with hikers and bicycle riders. Small cabins fronted by an expanse of lawn, barbecue pits, a volleyball court, and a duck pond are the perfect place to meet or clean up and recover from your adventures. Large groups are welcome and reservations are accepted. The "Esca-latté" Coffee Shop, located at the Outfitters, features cappucino, homemade breakfast rolls and muffins, pizza, a salad bar, and beer on tap.
The Escalante Interagency Visitors Information Center combines the offices of Dixie National Forest, the Bureau of Land Management, and the National Park Service. The personnel there can provide information on road conditions, hiking, and camping, and they can issue backcountry permits. They also sell maps and books. The Center is located along Highway 12 on the west side of town.
The town of Boulder has limited services. There are two gas stations, a couple of small markets, several cafes, and two motels. Boulder is the home of Anasazi State Park, which contains the Coombs site, a large Anasazi town that dates back more than 700 years. It is open year around and is worth visiting.