climbers throughout the United States. The Yosemite Decimal System is divided into five classes:
1.
Trail or flat walking. No objective dangers.
2.
Off-trail walking. Some scrambling and boulder hopping. Steeper terrain.
3.
Definite scrambling. Hands may be needed for balance. Exposure to heights possible.
4.
Large hand-and foot-holds are used. A fall could have serious consequences. The use of a rope with beginners is often necessary. This is as difficult as the average, experienced, and fit hiker can handle. If you get to a section that looks too hard, do not do it. Climbing Class-4 routes with a heavy pack can make them very difficult. Many may wish to use a rope.
5.
The fifth-class category, which is normally the start of roped climbing, is broken down into smaller segments: 5.0-5.14. Except for avoidable digressions, there are no problems over Class 5.4 in difficulty in the guide. If you are not familiar with roped climbing techniques, you should stay away from the fifth-class routes. There should be at least one person in your party who can lead the hard parts of a route without protection. Belay anchors and intermediate protection are often nonexistent in canyon country. Exposure heights are given in the description of the hikes when applicable. Example: (Class 5.1, 30') means there is a Class 5.1 move on a thirty foot-tall wall, slab, or chimney. All ratings assume the use of tennis shoes or hiking boots. Specialized rock boots could substantially lower the ratings.
Special equipment: Each hike presents its own set of problems and may require some special equipment. When climbing ropes are mentioned, realize that old clothesline, ski rope, or nylon parachute cord is not adequate. Suitable climbing equipment and a knowledge of how to use it properly are essential.
Several of the routes require short stretches of swimming. Floating packs on a Therm-a-Rest does not work well, nor does stuffing your pack into a large garbage bag. They always seem to snag on something and rip at the wrong time. An automotive type inner tube works well and, though heavy, will ensure that your pack stays dry. Small bicycle pumps are adequate for inflating the tubes.
Hint: Use a valve-stem tool to remove the valve from the inner tube. Blow up the inner tube by mouth as much as possible, then use the pump. The tube can be filled quickly this way.
There are many hikes detailed in the guide that involve wading. Unless the wading is on smooth, sandy terrain, tennis shoes are not