calante. Townspeople from neighboring communities gave assistance and watched the proceedings.
Modern-day hikers can only get a taste of what the Hole-in-theRock was really like. Several large boulders now choke the upper sections and the fill that smoothed the ramp has long since washed away. A careful search, especially ten to twenty feet above the present floor, will reveal signs of the old trail.
Hole-In-The-Rock Road Section
Access to Hikes #10 through 29

Access is from Highway 12.

Provides access to the Harris Wash road, Egypt road, Early Weed 

     Bench road, Dry Fork Coyote road, Red Well road, Hurricane 

     Wash trailhead, and the Fortymile Ridge road.

MapsDave Canyon, Tenmile Flat, Seep Flat, Sunset Flat, Basin 

     Canyon, Big Hollow Wash, Sooner Bench, and Davis Gulch.
The Hole-in-the-Rock road starts at mile 64.8 on Highway 12 (located at elevation 5740 on the Dave Canyon map) The road is suitable for high clearance vehicles to mile 50.8. From there to the Hole-in-the-Rock is for 4WDs only. This is a long, rough road. Make sure to carry plenty of gas and water. There is camping near the road. (See Map Fifteen.)
Note: The Hole-in-the-Rock road traverses the area under the eastern escarpment of the Kaiparowits Plateau. The many names used to describe the Kaiparowits Plateau often are confusing to the first time visitor. The whole upland area is commonly called the Kaiparowits Plateau even though the actual plateau is several miles to the west of the near-vertical cliffs facing you as you drive down the Hole-in-the-Rock road. The near-vertical cliffs are called the Straight Cliffs, though the section between Escalante and the Collet Top road (at mile 13.7) is also called the Escalante Rim. Bevond Collet Top, the highlands above the Straight Cliffs are named Fiftymile Mountain. Throughout the guide I have used the names Fiftymile Mountain and the Kaiparowits Plateau interchangeably.
0.0
On Highway 12 at the start of the signed Hole-in-the-Rock road. Go southeast.
3.3
(Tenmile Flat map.) "Tee." Signed road to Cedar Wash on the right (S). This road goes to Cedar Wash Arch and Covered Wagon Natural Bridge.
Side road to Cedar Wash Arch and Covered Wagon Natural Bridge