Land status:
This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
Boulder Creek, named by Almon Thompson of the Powell surveys for the black lava boulders that line its floor, is my single favorite canyon in the Escalante. The main attractionbeyond easy access from a paved road, idyllic swim holes, and fine campingis the bucolic ambience of the canyon. This is the perfect place to spend a day or two reading, relaxing, or exploring and photographing the extensive slickrock benches on the east side of both Boulder and Deer creeks.
The route starts on the Hogback section of Highway 12 and descends a cattle trail to Boulder Creek, which is followed to its confluence with Deer Creek. A steep, unnamed canyon that starts near the confluence leads back to the trailhead.
To Boulder Creek
(Calf Creek map and Map Seven.) Hike several hundred yards northeast over a sandy hill and down into a wide, steep, east-running drainage (shown to the east of elevation 5863). Follow it down until you are on a cliff above Boulder Creek. (Map Eight.) Cut left a few paces and descend the remnants of a constructed cattle trail to the canyon floor. (0.5 hours.)
Rock climber's note: A short technical slot leads to Boulder Creek. From the trailhead go through a gate in the barb-wire fence. Hike east-southeast into a shallow drainage (shown one-half mile south of elevation 6228). Go downcanyon past a string of large reed-filled potholes. The canyon narrows into a stunning slot. There are several potholes to stem or wade. One of them may be difficult to exit on its far end if water levels are low and you are not able to chimney across it. Be wary!
The last drop is into a huge pothole. Slide five feet into the water and swim across. As always, lower the first person with a rope to check water depth. The slot can also be passed on the right (LDC) by a difficult and exposed climb (Class 5.1, 40'). Pass the next narrow section on the left, then descend a short slab to Boulder Creek. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Down Boulder Creek
Hike and wade downcanyon. Short stretches of willow thrashing are interspersed with small but delightful pools cut into corrugated slickrock. Good camping and larger swim holes are found near the confluence of Boulder and Deer creeks. (King Bench map.) (1.5-2.5 hours.)