road/Harris Wash road junction. Lands above many of the Escalante River tributaries would have been opened for development. The proposal died when locals, though mainly anti-wilderness, decided they were anti-development as well.
Cattle grazing
One of the most important issues facing the Escalante area is overgrazing by cattle. One only has to hike in The Gulch, upper Twentyfive Mile Wash, Dry Fork Coyote, Steep Creek, Llewellyn Gulch, Davis Gulch, and many other canyons that flow to the Escalante River to see the damage done by these four-footed bulldozers.
It is most revealing to compare these areas to those where cattle grazing has been eliminated. In 1992, a private foundation bought the 55,000-acre Glen Canyon grazing permit. This permit, though not covering all of the Escalante canyons that are in Glen Canyon National Recreation Area, did permanently stop grazing in such popular canyons as lower Harris Wash, lower Twentyfive Mile Wash, Scorpion Gulch, and Coyote Gulch.
The Bureau of Land Management oversees cattle grazing not only in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument but also on the lands administered by the National Park Service in Glen Canyon National Recreation Area. If you have comments about cattle grazing after you visit the Escalante, write the BLM office in Escalante. (See the "Access" chapter for the address.) Those interested in learning more about cattle grazing or in becoming actively involved in the cattle grazing issue in the Escalante should write or call:
Great Old Broads for Wilderness 

1942 Broadway #206 

Boulder, Colorado 80302 

303-443-7024
The Great Old Broads for Wilderness is actively working on the grazing problems in the Escalante.
The wilderness issue
The first proposal to save the wildlands of southern Utah and the canyons of the Escalante was suggested in 1936. Secretary of the Interior Harold Ickes recommended the establishment of Escalante National Monument. It would have contained almost 7,000 square miles, or 4.5 million acres, and encompassed almost all of what we now term canyon country. In a preliminary report at the time to Governor Henry H. Blood, the Utah State Planning Board stated: "The principal advantages that will accrue from the designa-