Navajo and Kayenta. You cannot see the actual spring from the rim. First, find a Navajo prow with a vertical crack running up its middle on the far (E) side of Silver Falls Creek. The prow is directly across the canyon from the spring. (It is located one-half mile west-northwest of elevation 5234AT.) This will get you in the general area. Look for the bright white and green deposits that typically mark seeps on a wall and for a round, silver water tank with a white-tipped fence that runs to it on a Kayenta bench. You may see a cattle trail on the bench.
Make your way down the Navajo on the upcanyon (N) side of the spring. Follow the cattle trail to the spring, which has a medium flow of water. A cattle trail now runs generally southwest along the Kayenta bench below the Navajo cliffs into Silver Falls Creek. Silver Falls Creek has a medium flow of water where you join it. If the creekbed is dry, simply walk downcanyon to the Escalante River. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
The Overland RouteSilver Falls Creek to Choprock Canyon
Out of Silver Falls Creek
(Silver Falls Bench map.) From the Escalante River, hike up Silver Falls Creek for about twenty-three minutes. Locate a prow of Navajo high on the wall to the right. It has a prominent vertical crack running up its west face. This is the same prow used to find Cliff Spring. A hundred yards upcanyon from the prow is a cattle trail to the right (E) that goes up a short slope to a bench. (If you go too far upcanyon, a wall of Wingate rises out of the streambed and there is no possible exit. Backtrack for a couple of hundred yards.) This trail can be difficult to find.
Follow the trail upcanyon along a bench for fifty yards. It then turns right (SE) and goes up a heavily gullied Kayenta slope. Once you are on the trail, it is easy to follow as it winds its way along ledges to the top of the cliff. You are now on Silver Falls Bench. (0.5 hours.)
Historical note: You will pass a cowboy glyph from Peter Deuel-June 15, 1915, Marion WoolsleyApril 10, 1924, and Carter Ormond. The Deuel and Woolsley families were some of the first to move to Escalante, in 1876. The Ormonds arrived in the 1890s.
Across Silver Falls Bench
The trail disappears on the top of the cliff. Hike east for twenty minutes over an escarpment to the rim of a wide canyon that contains two drainages. A large tower (elevation 551 1T) will be visible to the southeast. (The two drainages are shown to the east and west of elevation 5511 T.)