strenuous route that is for experienced canyoneers only. Familiarity with low-impact camping techniques is essential.
Special equipment:
A fifty-foot rope is necessary.
Land status:
This hike is in Glen Canyon National Recreation Area.
From the trailhead the terrain covered by this hike looks like Willa Cather country, a land "that keeps no secrets." What you cannot immediately see, though, are the splendid canyons that have cut deep into Navajo Sandstone as well as through the detritus that has fallen from the heights of Fiftymile Mountain. Just because these canyons do not end at the Escalante River does not mean they are second-rate. Like all classics, they deserve your utmost attention.
The route starts on the Hole-in-the-Rock road and follows the base of Sixty Point to the top of Llewellyn Gulch. It is followed down to Lake Powell. A cross-country hop leads to Lake Powell, then into Cottonwood Gulch. Follow the base of Sixty Point back to the trailhead.
To Llewellyn Gulch
(Davis Gulch map and Map Thirty-four.) From the parking area look southeast at Fiftymile Point (labeled on the Nasja Mesa map) On the top of the point is the small Hole-in-the-Rock Arch. To the south, beyond the arch and a prominent prowand barely visibleis a bay that forms the head of the North Fork of Llewellyn Gulch. (The bay is shown to the east of elevation 5951T.) The second bay to the south (shown to the east of elevation 5952T) marks the top of the South Fork of Llewellyn Gulch, which is your immediate goal.
It is easiest to hike near the base of the cliffs below the reddish Entrada Sandstone. Once you find it, a cattle trail makes for casual hiking. Do not make the mistake of cutting straight toward the first bay from the trailhead or you will encounter insurmountable problems.
Cross the head of the North Fork.
Rock climber's note: Instead of continuing to the South Fork, you can descend the North Fork. There are several rappels of up to thirty feet in length. Chockstones can be used to anchor a rope.
(Map Thirty-six.) Follow the cattle trail across several deep ravines into the second bay, which is marked by a couple of watering troughs. The South Fork starts as a wash at the troughs. (1.0-1.5 hours.)