leading the climbing sections without protection. Except for the climbing sections, this is a moderate hike.
Special equipment:
After recent rains wading shoes may be necessary. A forty-foot rope is necessary.
Land status:
This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
William Strunk in his popular book Elements of Style says that the word "nice" is "a shaggy, all-purpose word, to be used sparingly." Yet no other word as accurately describes the hike into Red Breaks. It is not quite a great hike; it is a ''nice" hike. Yet, when friends come out to visit, this is often the route we do.
The hike starts at the Harris Wash trailhead, ascends a narrow canyon, crosses a slickrock ridge, and descends another canyon back to the start.
Up Red Breaks Canyon
(Red Breaks map and Map Sixteen.) From the trail register follow the track across (not down) Harris Wash. Within a couple of minutes the track crosses a sandy wash that comes in on the left (N). This is Red Breaks Canyon. (Red Breaks Canyon is not named on the map. Its mouth is at the "W" in Wash.)
Follow the rabbitbrush-lined wash upcanyon. The colorful Carmel hills give way to a low-walled Navajo inner gorge. Pass a fall on the right (LUC) by ascending a broken slab (Class 5.0, 20'). Above the fall the canyon divides. Stay with the main channel to the right (NE).
The canyon again narrows, and after recent rains there may be some shallow wading or strenuous stemming. A couple of chockstones wedged in the narrows are irksome (Class 5.3, 15'). The canyon alternates between short stretches of narrows and open areas. Several side canyons enter, but all are above streambed level and are barely noticeable.
Finally, the canyon does divide. The left fork (NW) narrows quickly and ends at a large pothole. The right fork (NE) has a short pour-off that drops into a medium pothole. (2.0-2.5 hours.)
Climb north up a steep slab between the forks (Class 4-), then follow the left rim of the right (E) fork until it is possible to drop back to the canyon floor. Before descending, note a prominent dome (elevation 6015) in the distance at the top of the canyon. The canyon floor widens into a shimmering expanse of slickrock and a string of medium potholes. Nearby domes and buttresses shadow the curving patterns of cross-stratified Navajo sandstonea photographer's heaven.