Everett Ruess
Once more I am drunk with the lust of life and adventure and unbearable beauty. I have the devil's own conception of a perfect time; adventure seems to beset me on all quarters without my even searching for it . . . 

Everett Ruess, 1934
In early November 1934 a young man riding a burro entered the small farm and ranch community of Escalante. After spending several weeks camping close to town on the Escalante River, socializing with locals, and exploring nearby canyons, the man headed east along the Hole-in-the-Rock road into the canyons of the lower desert. It was the last anyone would see of him. The mystery surrounding the disappearance of Everett Ruess is one of the enduring stories associated with the canyons of the Escalante.
Everett Ruess was born in California in 1914, the son of an artist and a minister. It was through them that he developed an interest in and a skill at writing, sketching, and wood-block carving. During a summer school break, the teenager set out on his first solo foray away from home, a three-month-long hitchhiking, backpacking, and camping loop. Starting in Los Angeles, Everett followed the California coast to Monterey, then headed east to Yosemite and the Sierra Nevada. The final leg of the journey led south to Mono Lake and back home.
Everett loved the freedom he had while traveling and delighted in the country he saw. The lure of wild places was intense and the joy he found there is reflected in his writings and artwork. After graduating from high school he again headed out, this time toward the canyons and mesas of the Four Corners region.
For eleven months Everett traveled, usually afoot, selling his art prints and picking up odd jobs as necessary. With a burro purchased in the Indian community of Kayenta, Everett made his way to the Grand Canyon, Monument Valley, southern Utah, and Zion National Park. He stopped to paint the famous ruins at Betatakin, Keet Seel, and Canyon de Chelly and stayed several days with John Wetherill, the man who discovered Mesa Verde.
Returning home, Everett enrolled at UCLA, but lasted only one semester before finding he needed to be on the road again. A friend received a letter from Everett expressing his dissatisfaction with college life: "How little you know me to think that I could still be in the University! How could a lofty, unconquerable soul like mine remain imprisoned in that academic backwater, wherein all but the most docile wallow in a hopeless slough?"