floor of a canyon. Stay out of narrow canyons when it is raining. If it starts raining while you are in a narrow canyon, get out immediately. The slickrock above the canyons does not hold water well. Often it takes only a couple of minutes of rain to send a wall of water through a canyon. Canyons can flash flood even though it is not raining on you. An ominous rumble from up the canyon may signify a flood. Scramble to high ground.
Time: For the most part, the times listed are the times it will take the average, fit, and moderately experienced person to do the described hike. A hike that is described for beginners to take three to four hours will take that long for them. A hike that takes ten to twelve hours for advanced canyoneers might take twenty hours for a novice. If you plan to do lots of exploring, photographing, or relaxing, add extra time to your itinerary. Due to the demanding nature of some of the hikes, it is prudent to carry extra food in case the trip takes longer than planned.
The suggested number of days a hike will take is just a recommendation. For most backpackers five to seven hours of walking a day is plenty. The times shown in parentheses ( ) every few paragraphs will help you plan your days and still allow you to determine your own agenda. These times are broad estimates; do not use them to compute actual hiking time between points.
Elevation range: The lowest and the highest elevations on the route.
Maps: The maps listed are all USGS 7.5-minute series topographic maps. There are many references to the maps in the route descriptions. Maps must be carried on all of the hikes. Maps noted in the road sections and in the preface for each hike are listed in the order they are used. As you move through the text, map changes are indicated by the name of the new map printed in bold type.
All of the maps listed in this guide are available from Escalante Outfitters. (Its address and phone number is in the ''Access" chapter.) You can order the maps from the Outfitters or call ahead and have them reserve a set for you which you can pick up on your way through town. Escalante Outfitters also has most of the USGS 7.5 minute series maps for southern Utah. The cost is the same as from the USGS and the Outfitters can have the maps to you in a week instead of the couple of months it takes to get them from the USGS. The Escalante Interagency Office also carries maps of the area.
Many of the maps in the guide are based on the 7.5-minute maps and have been reproduced in their original size. They show