Alternate route: If water is a problem, you can enter Scorpion Gulch. Instead of following the Scorpion Horse Trail up the hill to the top of the escarpment, continue north on the Kayenta until you are above Scorpion Gulch. Now follow tiring Kayenta ledges up Scorpion Gulch until it is possible to descend to the canyon floor near the spring-fed pools.
To the trailhead
From the top of the escarpment, Scorpion Point is visible to the west-southwest. Using the point as a landmark, make your way along the rim of Scorpion Gulch to its head (2.0-2.5 hours.)
The sand dune you used initially to get into Scorpion Gulch will be visible a short distance downcanyon. Use directions from Hike #15 to get back to the trailhead. (3.5-4.5 hours.)
Dry Fork Coyote Road Section
Access to Hike #19. 

Access is from the Hole-in-the-Rock road. 

MapBig Hollow Wash.
The Dry Fork Coyote road starts 25.9 miles down the Hole-in-the-Rock road at the ''Dry Fork Trailhead 1.7 mi." sign (shown as a Jeep Trail at elevation 4884 on the Big Hollow Wash map) The track is suitable for high-clearance vehicles. There are several campsites along the track. (See Map Fifteen.)
0.0
At the Hole-in-the-Rock road. Go east.
0.6
"Y." Go left (W). The track you are now on is not shown on the USGS map.
1.6
Start of Peek-a-boo and Spooky GulchesThe Standard Loop Hike #19. At a parking circle on the edge of a cliff. Limited camping. The trailhead is not shown on the USGS map. It is located one-quarter mile north of elevation 4932. You are in Navajo Sandstone.
Digression: Dry Fork Coyote provides alternative access to Hurricane Wash and Coyote Gulch. Although the wash in its upper reaches is sandy and tiring to hike, several short side canyons make it worthwhile. The text that follows notes water sources.
See Hike #19 for directions on entering Dry Fork Coyote. Once in the canyon, hike down it, passing the mouths of Peek-a-boo, Spooky, and Brimstone gulches. A short side canyon to the left (shown to the east of elevation 4803) contains a long string of medium potholes and a small natural bridge.
Boxelder Canyon (LKA), named for a small stand of those trees near its mouth, comes in on the left (N) (located to the east of