Elevation range:
3700' to 6000'.
Water:
Water availability is a major problem on this route. The text that follows notes water sources.
Maps:
Davis Gulch, Nasja Mesa, Navajo Point, and Sooner Bench.
Skill level:
Difficult route finding. Class 5.2 climbing with lots of exposure. The leader must be experienced with belay techniques and be capable of leading the climbing sections without protection. This is an exceptionally strenuous hike that is suitable for experienced canyoneers only. Low-impact camping skills are essential.
Special equipment:
An eighty-foot climbing rope is necessary.
Land status:
This hike is in Glen Canyon National Recreation Area.
Every great canyoneering route has four essential components: spectacular canyons, intimate narrows, big views, and physical challenges. This hike brings to the fore each of those elements: Twilight Canyon and its many slot-like tributaries, the daily views of Navajo Mountain and the surrounding country, and the demanding terrain you must cover to tie the individual pieces together. Off the beaten track and in obscure country, only those with extensive canyoneering experience should attempt this hike.
The route starts on the Hole-in-the-Rock road, goes up a steep slope to the top of Sixty Point, and then continues down Twilight Canyon to Lake Powell. A devious route out of the canyon and pleasant walking under the south end of Sixty Point leads to Hidden Passage and Reflection canyons and back to the trailhead.
To Sixty Point
(Davis Gulch map and Map Thirty-four.) From the trailhead look south-southeast. You will see a deep bay with huge walls. Two long green ridges run up the right side of the bay to the top of the cliffs. The ridge on the left ends below a cliff. The ridge on the right ends at the top of the cliff. Sharp eyes may be able to pick out a vague cattle trail. (The ridge is located one-eighth mile northwest of elevation 4730T.) Trudge 1,500 feet up the ridge on the right to its top. The cattle trail is apparent along thin sections of the ridge. You are now on Fiftymile Bench. Do not continue to the top of the Kaiparowits Plateau. (You cut a corner of the Sooner Bench map and will end up one-quarter mile east of elevation 5934 on the Navajo Point map.) (2.0-3.0 hours.)