Water:
Water availability is not a problem on this hike. A perennial stream starts flowing about halfway down Davis Gulch, below Bement Arch.
Elevation range:
3760' to 4315'.
Map:
Davis Gulch.
Skill level:
Easy route finding. There is one long cross-country stretch. Class 5.2 rock climbing. The leader must be experienced with belay techniques and be capable of leading the climbing sections without protection. There are short stretches of wading or swimming. This is a long strenuous dayhike that is suitable only for experienced canyoneers. This route is not appropriate for novice canyoneers, youngsters, or youth groups.
Special equipment:
A forty-foot rope and wading boots.
Land status:
This hike is in Glen Canyon National Recreation Area.
The Latin phrase "multum in parvo"a great deal in a small spaceaccurately describes the Davis Gulch experience. This short canyon, once much longer before the flooding of its lower reaches by Lake Powell, packs a wallop. The upper part, a tight, difficult, and elegant slot, leads into a wide Navajo-walled canyon replete with rows of Moqui steps, beaver ponds, and a mammoth arch.
The route starts on the Hole-in-the-Rock road and goes through the narrows of Davis Gulch, past Bement Arch, and exits the canyon via an old cattle trail near Lake Powell. A rim walk takes you back to the trailhead.
Historical note: Davis Gulch was named for the Davis brothers, George and Johnny, both early residents of Escalante. They ran sheep above the gulch.
The first narrows
(Davis Gulch map and Map Thirty-three.) Look west toward the Straight Cliffs. Hole-in-the-Rock Arch on Fiftymile Point is visible high on the skyline. It will be useful as a landmark at the end of the hike.
Walk north from the road into the shallow head of Davis Gulch. The canyon narrows quickly as it cuts deep into the Navajo Sandstone. Drops of up to ten feet over chockstones prove exciting. Belays may be necessary in places. The canyon opens. If the going seemed demanding during the initial section of the slot, this is the