Man in the EscalanteThe Prehistoric Period
No black is blacker than the window of an Anasazi Indian cliff dwelling. Stone the color of salmon flesh frames these small rectangles of thick, palpable emptiness, frames a darkness with the density of night on water, the river beneath a moonless sky.

Ellen Meloy, 1994
Little is known of the first arrival of prehistoric humans in the Escalante River region. Inconclusive evidencefragments of Folsom projectile points and petroglyphs purportedly depicting woolly mammothsplace Paleo-Indians in the area at about 10,000 B.C. These Paleo-Indians were big-game hunters who roamed large areas while following seasonal migrations. They utilized stone tools and sharp sticks and lived in primitive shelters or caves. While the evidence is scanty in the Escalante area, it is known that Paleo-Indians occupied nearby sections of southern Utah and that woolly mammoths did wander the canyons of the lower Escalante.
Indians of the Desert Archaic Culture (5500 B.C. to A.D. 500) lived in Glen Canyon and its tributaries, specifically those to the north and east of the Escalante canyons. They evolved from the Paleo-Indians with their big-game hunting tradition to a people of cultural diversity. A hunter-gatherer tradition was born. Instead of meat being the main food staple, the gathering of nuts, roots, and berries predominated. Baskets, crudely woven at first, became more sophisticated, and pottery was soon introduced. Woven sandals and blankets and sewn animal-hide clothing and footwear were used. Atlatls, or spear throwers, gave way to the bow and arrow toward the end of the Desert Archaic Period.
The first Indians to definitely inhabit the Escalante River drainage date to the late Basketmaker II Period (approximately A.D. 400). The late date of Indian occupation compared to other areas of the Southwest was a function of the Escalante's remote location and a lack of need for its resources until burgeoning populations to the north and east forced Indian groups to seek new lands to settle. Certainly the canyons and upland areas of the Escalante were inviting. Large areas of tillable bottomland were abundant next to perennial streams. A plentiful supply of caves must have seemed a godsend.
Most important was the ecological diversity of the area. The dry, warm lowland canyons and the wet, cool highlands of the Kaiparowits Plateau allowed the Indians to exploit a wide variety of flora and fauna. Two distinct cultures were poised at about the same time to enter the new territorythe Fremont and the Anasazi.