Creek there is a short stretch of medium springs along the canyon floor. The main fork comes in on the right (N). (2.0-3.0 hours.)
Down Moody Creek
The canyon narrows. A couple of abandoned meanders on the right prove interesting. Getting behind the first abandoned meander requires a stiff scramble. Its outer wall contains a small but exquisite arch. The second abandoned meander is for rock climbers only. Access is through a tight slot (Class 5.2, 25').
Medium springs appear from time to time before you reach the Escalante River. There is good camping near the confluence. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
To East Moody Canyon
Stay on the left (LDC) side of the Escalante River as you head downcanyon. After a short stretch of troublesome walking along a vague path, the path widens into an oft-used horse-packer's trail that leads to the mouth of East Moody Canyon. There is good camping at the confluence. (1.0 hour.)
Up East Moody Canyon
The hike up East Moody Canyon back to the trailhead takes one long day and, unless there have been recent rains, the canyon may be dry. Slower groups will want to jump start the day. Load up with water at the river.
The canyon itself starts as a narrow Wingate-walled cleft lined with medium springs and large cottonwoods. Photographer Philip Hyde made the heavily varnished walls of East Moody Canyon famous through his images. The canyon slowly widens as it enters the colorful gray, green, and purple slopes of the Chinle Formation.
The West Fork of East Moody Canyon comes in on the left (N) and is the one you want to follow. (This fork is not named on the map. It contains elevation 5037AT.) There are medium springs a short distance up both forks. Watch carefully for this fork. If you miss it and go up the main fork to the right, you will be in deep dodo. (2.5-3.5 hours.)
Up the West Fork of East Moody Canyon
The West Fork is narrow and boulder-choked, and it has a short section of an old mining track along its right side. The mining track disappears quickly in the rubble-filled streambed. When the track does reappear, follow it through rolling Chinle hills. The track reenters the wash, then turns left (N), and goes through a pass in the Wingate. (You have gone off the Scorpion Gulch map, onto the Stevens Canyon North map for a short distance, and are now one-