The Chinle Formation contains a rainbow of colorsred, brown, purple, gray, and greenand forms steep and, when wet, very gooey muddy slopes. It often contains petrified wood.
A substratum of the Chinle Formation, the Shinarump Member, contains uranium ore. Uranium dissolved from the ash layers percolated through the porous sandstone of the Shinarump Member, where it was chemically precipitated by decomposed plant material. The plant material had been washed down streams and had collected in pockets and seams. Later, uranium miners looked for these pockets and seams. The presence of petrified wood often was an indicator that uranium deposits were near. The Shinarump Member is a dense, dirty white, medium-grained sandstone up to 150 feet thick. Parts of it contain river gravel and it can resemble concrete. Since the Shinarump Member is at the bottom of the Chinle Formation and is very resistant to erosion, it often stands out boldly as the top of the slopes and cliffs of the Moenkopi Formation.
Wingate Sandstone is found throughout the Escalante region. It is a cliff-forming, cross-bedded sandstone that is up to 350 feet thick. The Wingate was formed during a period of aridity and sand seas and its colors range from a light red to almost brown. This can vary considerably, and it is not unusual to see near-white Wingate Sandstone. This can make it hard to differentiate from Navajo Sandstone. Often the context it is in, immediately above the Chinle Formation and below the Kayenta Formation, is the clue to whether it is Wingate or Navajo. The Wingate forms vertical walls that have vertical cracks.
The Kayenta Formation records the last gasp of the Ancestral Uncompahgre Uplift. In a wetter period between the times of the Wingate and Navajo deserts, westward-flowing streams brought down final contributions of sand and silt. Repeated shifting of the channels and variation in the flow volumes scoured and filled the ancient streambeds to produce layers that persist for only short distances. Bed thickness and grain size decrease to the west as the current slackened. The formation, up to 400 feet thick, is reddish brown to dark purplish red in color and forms broken ledges and steep slopes. The Kayenta Formation is the friend of the backpacker, as it can provide wide benches that are easy to negotiate.
Navajo Sandstone is a cliff-forming, cross-bedded sandstone that is up to 1,250 feet thick. It is a dune deposit like the Wingate and it formed in a sand sea that not only covered the whole Colorado Plateau but extended well beyond. Navajo Sandstone is usually lighter in color than Wingate Sandstone, varying from bright white to red. It forms vertical walls, but the tops of the cliffs tend to be more rounded than Wingate cliffs.
Page Sandstone is a light-gray to red cliff-forming, cross-bedded