of elevation 5828T). Trees partially block its mouth. A large pothole is located 100 yards up this sand-floored canyon. There is no camping near the pothole due to the potential for flash floods. Slickrock benches a couple of minutes downcanyon can be used for camping. (2.0-2.5 hours.)
The canyon constricts into breathtaking narrows. There are small obstacles to overcome (Class 5.0, 10'), minor route-finding challenges, and perhaps a short section or two of wading before reaching the crux narrows. (Silver Falls Bench map.)
The crux narrows
The crux narrows start at an eight-foot drop over a boulder into a pool. If the pool is shallow, it is easiest to wade across. Tall, strong climbers (basketball centers and the like) can chimney over the pool with a pack. To bypass the crux, hike back upcanyon for 100 yards and exit via a steep crack/slot (Class 3) to the left (LUC)(WSW). Scramble to the top of the Wingatenot to the top of the Kayentaand follow it downcanyon for several minutes until you are forced up the Kayenta to the top of a peninsula that runs west to east. Proceed to the east end of the peninsula and descend a steep chute (Class 3) into the canyon. The bottom of the chute is choked with wood.
To Horse Canyon
The remainder of Little Death Hollow holds no surprises. (Red Breaks map.) Short narrows can be easily skirted on ledges. There is good camping and medium potholes. After the canyon cuts through the Wingate and into the Kayenta, it intersects Horse Canyon, which has a large flow of water. (2.0-4.0 hours.)
To Wolverine Creek
Hike ten minutes up Horse Canyon to a line shack. The springs that feed the canyon start here. (The line shack and spring are shown on the map.) The canyon above is usually dry. This is the last reliable water until back at the trailhead. There is fair camping in the area. Continue up Horse Canyon for twenty minutes to the mouth of Wolverine Creek, which comes in on the right (ENE). (King Bench map.)
Up Wolverine Creek
The first section of Wolverine Creek is wide, but the canyon quickly narrows as it enters the Wingate. There may be short stretches of shallow wading after recent rains.
Historical note: Prospectors heading to the Circle Cliffs Basin mining area from the town of Escalante sometimes went up