Digression: This short narrow slot is reminiscent of Brimstone Gulch, but is even darker. It is worth checking out. (0.5 hours round-trip.)
Ringtail cats are rarely seen in the Escalante area, but they have been observed in the pitch-black depths of this canyon. Ringtails are closely related to raccoons and have a similar banded tail. Subsisting on berries, eggs, small rodents, insects, birds, bats, and lizards, they are active at night and build their dens in trees or in the cracks of cliffs.
To Baker Canyon
Baker Canyon is the next canyon to the left (N) as you continue down the river. (Baker Canyon is not named on the map. It is shown at elevation 4468T.) (2.5-4.0 hours.)
Digression: Baker Canyon is cottonwood-lined and boulderclogged in its lower reaches and ends at a fall. (0.5 hours roundtrip.)
To Twentyfive Mile Wash
A half hour below Baker Canyon, Twentyfive Mile Wash comes in on the right (W). There is no camping at its brush-choked mouth, but good sites appear upcanyon. (0.5-1.0 hours.)
Up Twentyfive Mile Wash
Proceed up Twentyfive Mile Wash. It has a large flow of water and, although there is a trail, beaver dams have formed ponds that may force you to wade.
Alternate route: This route takes you out of Twentyfive Mile Wash near its mouth and back to the Egypt trailhead. Walk upcanyon. Fifteen minutes from the mouth of the canyon pass an arc (arcs are arches that have not quite broken through) that is on the right wall. A second arc appears around the corner. It has an unapproachable cliff dwelling under it. A hundred yards past the dwelling is a low point of land that forces the streambed against the left wall (shown one-quarter mile south-southeast of elevation 495 1T). Find a short slot/ramp on the right (LUC)(W) that allows access to the top of the low point. Make your way west through the Wingate, then turn north and find a route to the top of the Kayenta (many options). Travel generally west below a long ridge of rounded Navajo slickrock that is to the left (S) until the ridge ends at a wide side canyon that drops to the Escalante River. (The highest point on this ridge is elevation 5175T.) Scramble north over the ridge. From the top of the ridge, the long Navajo escarpment that contains the Egypt trailhead will be visible to the west-northwest. Cross a broken plain and follow the horse trail back to the trailhead. (3.0-4.5 hours.)