Sand Creek, which is followed to the Escalante River. The return route is the same as that described in Death Hollow Hike #1 and follows the Bowington road to the Boulder Mail Trail (BMT) as it crosses Slickrock Saddle Bench. A cross-country route along the ridge that divides Death Hollow from Sand Creek leads back to the trailhead.
Down Sand Creek
(Roger Peak map and Map Two.) From the trailhead, hike south down Sand Creek into Box-Death Hollow Wilderness Area. You will be wading from the start so do not hesitate getting your feet wet. Deadfalls, slippery climbs out of the creek onto benches, and tree limbs hanging over the stream make for slow going. The canyon narrows as it enters the Navajo and the hiking becomes even rougher. There arc few good campsites along the creek. After many miles the canyon opens into a park (near "Sand"). (4.5-7.5 hours.)
The Navajo walls give way to the limestones, siltstones, and sandstones of the Carmel Formation. Adequate campsites appear among large stands of big sagebrush. Again the canyon constricts and enters a short stretch of Navajo narrows that contain several small but idyllic pools (one-quarter mile southwest of elevation 6834). You are now in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument. (2.5-3.5 hours.)
As you exit the narrows look for colorful and carefully contoured towers and domes to the left (W). The Bowington road crosses Sand Creek here and there is excellent camping in the area (near the "S" in Sand on the Escalante map).
Twenty minutes below the Bowington road, Sweetwater Creek enters from the left (N). The flow of Sand Creek can nearly double. (Calf Creek map.) A couple of minutes downcanyon pass through a log fence, then under an old telephone cable high overhead. You are nearing the BMT, which enters from the left (N) at a shallow slickrock bowl. (The bowl is located by the red "8" on the map.) Lots of cairns mark the BMT. There is good camping in the area. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
Digression: You can exit the canyon here and follow the BMT to the Boulder Mail Trail trailhead, which takes about an hour. (See the Hells Backbone Road Section for the location of the trailhead.)
Alternate route: If you are averse to swimming through the narrows of Sand Creek, which are a short distance downcanyon from the BMT, they can be bypassed. From the confluence of Sand Creek and the BMT hike north up the slickrock bowl for 200 yards. Exit the bowl to the right (S). Hike along the rim of the canyon, pass behind a large dome (elevation 6236), cross a drainage, and return