der Mail Trail trailhead (described in the Hells Backbone Road Section), comes in on a tree-and brush-covered hillside to the left (NE) fifty yards below the squirter spring. If you can't find the BMT, look for an old telephone cable crossing the canyon above a large, wonderful, ponderosa-shaded campsite on a jut of land that forces the stream into a tight east-to-west bend. Backtrack for 100 yards. (The jut is located one-eighth mile east-northeast of elevation 6630.)
To Mamie Creek
Hike down Death Hollow for twenty-five minutes to the first break in the Navajo wall on the right (W). The BMT, marked with cairns, exits the canyon here. Many good campsites are in the area.
Digression: You can follow the west section of the BMT to the upper Escalante Canyon trailhead near the town of Escalante. (See the Highway 12 Road Section for directions to this trailhead, and see Hike #3 for details on hiking the BMT.)
As you continue down Death Hollow, the first tamarisks and Russian-olive trees appear. Both are imported species. Mamie Creek, unexceptional at its mouth, enters on the right (W). (2.0-3.0 hours.)
Digression: A hike up lower Mamie Creek is rewarding. Minor thrashing leads to a pool and large alcove. (1.0 hour round-trip.)
The final narrows
Forty-five minutes below Mamie Creek you will reach the lower narrows, the last impediment in Death Hollow. Pass a long string of pools on a thin ledge at water level on the left. If the water level is high, or if you are not comfortable traversing the ledge with a pack, you may have a short swim. Many consider these pools to be the prettiest in Death Hollow. Plan on extra time to swim, cavort, relax, and photograph these gems. (1.0-2.5 hours.)
To the Escalante
Hike down to the Escalante River. There are campsites near the confluence. (2.0-2.5 hours.)
Digression: You can leave the standard route here and hike east up the Escalante River to the upper Escalante Canyon trailhead near the town of Escalante. (See the Highway 12 Road Section for directions to this trailhead.) It takes about four hours.
Down the Escalante
(Calf Creek map.) Finding the exit route out of Escalante