Continue down the river. A side canyon to the north (shown to the southwest of elevation 5441) a couple of minutes past the bottom of the cattle trail contains a large spring. The canyon below narrows considerably. This is the narrowest section of the Escalante River. Past the narrows and after rounding a corner with a huge sand beach, look for an unapproachable cliff dwelling on a wall to the right (N). Several minutes below the dwelling cross a barb-wire fence.
Digression: Just before the fence, to the north, is a constructed cattle trail that leads to Brigham Tea Bench.
(Red Breaks map.) The next landmark worthy of note is a side canyon that comes in on the right (SW) in two hours. Its mouth, a narrow defile, leads into a short canyon that contains a large spring. (The canyon is located to the south of elevation 5355.)
An hour downcanyon The Gulch enters from the left (NW). Its mouth is a bit hard to see. There is poor camping in the area and The Gulch may or may not have clear water. (Map Fourteen.) (3.5-5.0 hours.)
To the ladders exit
After recent rains red water from The Gulch will cloud the Escalante River, making the going more hazardous, though the silt brought down the creek does help smooth out the floor of the stream. More petrified wood also becomes evident.
Ten minutes below the mouth of The Gulch a side canyon enters on the right (S). A thick stand of cottonwoods hides its mouth. This is the "ladders" canyon (shown one-half mile south of elevation 5365). There are now two choices for exiting Escalante Canyon. The first is easier and safer. The second, presented as a rock climber's note below, is the "ladders" route. It is dicey but fun. Whichever route you choose, load up with water before leaving the river.
From the mouth of the "ladders" drainage go downcanyon for a couple of minutes, crossing the river twice. Immediately before a sharp right corner (shown one-half mile south-southeast of elevation 5365) ascend a steep gully to the east. (If you go too far downcanyon, you will intersect a barb-wire fence. Backtrack for ten minutes.)
From the top of the gully find a break in the upper cliffs a couple of hundred yards to the east. You may find a faded row of Moqui steps on a short slab (Class 3 + ). Follow the rim of the "ladders" canyon to its head near the ladders. Now follow the shallow canyon southwest through the cliffs (there are a couple of options) to a large plain. (You will end up near elevation 5520.) (1.5-2.5 hours.)