Charles Hall) opened an Indian trading post near the river at the foot of the trail. It thrived for several years before they abandoned it.
The road from Escalante to Hole-in-the-Rock slowly improved over the years and by the mid-1950s it was graded regularly. Now the grader stops near the head of Davis Wash and the last several miles are passable only by four-wheel-drive vehicles, although the road may be upgraded in the near future.
The Hole-in-the-Rock route takes about an hour to explore. As you descend remember that during the original expedition the steep cliffs and drops that are now troublesome were filled with riprap. The large boulders blocking the way in places are recent products of erosion.
The hike to Lake Powell via the Jackass Bench trail provides access to the lake away from the swarms of tourists at Hole-in-the-Rock. Hike northeast to the rim of the canyon, then follow it north. The sheer wall gives way to a long sloping maze of slickrock sheets and domes that drop to the lake. Continue along the rim for a couple of minutes until you are forced to descend a steep slickrock hill. A line of cairns leads east down to the lake. (The trail starts one-quarter mile northwest of elevation 4252T on the Davis Gulch map and ends one-eighth mile south-southeast of elevation 4164T on The Rincon map.) Most of the constructed portions are near the lake. Do not panic if you miss the trail; there are many potential routes down the slickrock. Benches can be used for camping. (3.5-5.0 hours round-trip.)
Local rancher Hy Roundy used the Jackass Bench trail in 1919 while leading a group of miners to oil seeps a short distance above the mouth of the Escalante River in Glen Canyon. He described the slickrock portions of the trail as, "like being on ice" for his saddle stock. At the base of the trailwhich is now under waterRoundy recounted that the horses had to jump onto a steep sand dune. Some made the jump without falling; others landed on their sides. None were seriously hurt.
Harris Wash Road Section
Access to Hikes #10 and 11. 

Access is from the Hole-in-the-Rock road. 

Maps-Seep Flat, Sunset Flat, and Red Breaks.
The Harris Wash road starts 10.5 miles down the Hole-in-the-Rock road at the "7mi. Harris Wash" sign (located at elevation 5386 on the Seep Flat map) . The road is suitable for light-duty vehicles. There are few campsites along the road. (See Map Fifteen.)