can't have mines everywhere, and we shouldn't have mines that threaten our national treasures."
While Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument does protect the area from some intrusions, it does not give the land the same protection as would wilderness designation. Wilderness designation stops all but the most rudimentary incursions. Environmentalists worry that if development is allowed in the national monument-in the form of constructed and signed trails, upgraded roads, visitor centers, and campgroundsit will become a tourist draw like the popular national parks in southern Utah.
Designated wilderness is allowed within the national monument. For that reason, the wilderness battle in the Escalante is not over. Land that meets the definition of wilderness in the Escalante will still be included in America's Red Rocks Wilderness Act.
President Clinton, in his proclamation establishing Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument, gave the Bureau of Land Management, which will manage the national monument, three years from September 1996 to prepare a management plan for the area. The public has been invited to participate in discussions about how the monument will be managed in the future. Those interested in participating should contact the Bureau of Land Management office in Escalante (see the "Access" chapter for the address) or the Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance (address below).
The new national monument gives added protection to some of the land in southern Utah. But much more is at stake. Areas such as the Dirty Devil River, Dark Canyon, White Canyon, Comb Ridge, Cedar Mesa, San Rafael Swell, Nokai Dome, and many others still have no permanent protection.
It is up to each of us to decide which side of the wilderness issue to support. The Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance (SUWA) has been leading the pro-wilderness battle since 1984. It is in great part due to its leadership that we have not lost the Escalanteand other wilderness-worthy canyon areas throughout southern Utahto the developers and despoilers. The wilderness battle rages on in Utah and in the halls of Congress. Please make it a habit to donate to SUWA or other environmental organizations that are helping protect the Escalante and other wilderness lands in Utah. Consider it an essential part of every canyon hike you doa tithing for wilderness.
Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance 

1471 South 1100 East 

Salt Lake City, Utah 84105 

801-486-3161