shown at elevation 5658T. Pick up the trail a quarter mile northeast of the hill. It can be hard to follow in places, though cairns do help. The trail ends a quarter mile northeast of elevation 4032T on the Hall Mesa map. (2.0-3.0 hours.)
To Cliff
Follow the crest of the Waterpocket Fold generally north. This route looks straightforward, but there are several false summits and a couple of shallow canyons to cross. After recent rains there may be pothole water in scattered locations along the Navajo. "Cliff" (labeled on the map as Cliff at elevation 6745) is the highest point on this section of the Waterpocket Fold. There are several labeled bench marks on its Navajo summit. (5.0-7.0 hours.)
Water: From Cliff look southwest into the bowl of upper Stevens Canyon. Note a large freestanding tower with a smaller tower on its right side down in the bowl (elevation 6361T). Walk directly toward the right side of the larger tower (SW). You are searching for a large shallow pothole with cattails in it that is 150 yards inland from the rim. A huge cattail-choked pothole can be found 200 yards to the east-southeast of the shallow pothole by going over a rise and dropping into a deep depression. (Both water sources are a quarter mile west-northwest of the spring shown on the map.) It may take some scouting to find the potholes. Remember that bighorn sheep and deer depend on these potholes. Camp at least 300 feet from them and do not visit them at night.
Finding the descent canyon
The descent canyon is hard to locate. Follow the directions and your map carefully. From Cliff look north into the square-topped head of Millers Creek Canyon. (Map Twenty-seven.) Make your way north along the top of the Fold until you are even with the northwest end of Millers Creek Canyon. Go northwest, following the crest of the Waterpocket Fold for another twenty minutes. You will pass the head of a white, shallow, Navajo slickrock-lined canyon. This is the descent canyon. (The canyon starts at elevation 6601AT and goes south-southwest. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
Essential Digression: To make sure you descend the correct canyon, continue past the top of the canyon for about ten minutes until you can see the red Wingate walls of East Moody Canyon to the west-northwest. There are no other red-walled canyons in the vicinity. Backtrack to the descent canyon. Do not try to find the descent canyon without first locating East Moody Canyon. There are a couple of similar looking Navajo-lined canyons that feed into the descent canyon, but they contain impassable falls. (0.5 hours round-trip.)