Into Death Hollow
(Roger Peak map and Map Two.) From the signed parking area cross the road and find a vague path that goes southeast down a steep hillside to the bottom of an east-running draw. The path, which passes through thick stands of ponderosa pine, Douglas fir, aspen, and manzanita, leads to the floor of Death Hollow. Intensely white cliffs of Navajo Sandstone topped with a thin layer of Page Sandstone appear on the left. Once in Death Hollow proper a Dixie National Forest trail register appears. You have now entered Box-Death Hollow Wilderness Area. (1.0 hour.)
Historical note: There are two conflicting stories about the naming of Death Hollow. Old-timers tell the first story, and it is the most believable. They say that an early rancher named Death Hollow after some of his livestock fell off a steep section of the BMT as they descended into the canyon. The second story claims that Death Hollow was named for Washington Phipps, who had been killed by John Bowington on the Escalante River below Death Hollow. This story is recounted in Hike #7.
Down Death Hollow to the first water source
Hike down the wide canyon for many miles, cutting benches as you see fit. The canyon starts to narrow and the main streambed passes the right (W) side of an abandoned meander (elevation 7156). An hour below the meander, enter the first narrows, a short stretch that cuts through low Navajo walls and contains medium potholes. The narrows widen a bit. Look for a long, prominent, vertical brown streak on the slickrock to the left (LDC). It marks a spring, the first source of reliable water in Death Hollow. If the spring is not flowing well, make your way to the top of the brown streak. Large potholes dot the watercourse and there is excellent slickrock camping. (6.0-9.0 hours.)
Into the narrows
Fifteen minutes below the spring the real narrows begin. The first section contains several large potholes that require wading, stemming, or swimming. It is easy to pass this stretch on a bench to the right (LDC).
The canyon opens a little, then constricts again. You can either stay in the canyon or follow the left rim for a long distance before being forced back into the canyon.
The challenges mount. There are chockstones to negotiate and pools to swim or wade. It is important to belay the less experienced over the many small drops (up to Class 5.4, 12'). Packs can be lowered with a rope. The first major landmark, the Right Fork of Death Hollow, comes in on the left (NW). Its lower end contains large