Elevation range:
6300' to 6520'.
Maps:
Lamp Stand and Steep Creek Bench.
Skill level:
Moderately easy route finding. Class 2 + walking. This is a moderate hike.
Special equipment:
None.
Land status:
This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
Egghead, eggbeater, eggnog, egg roll, egg plant, eggshell, egg white, egg crate, egg coal, egg money, egg jockey (bomber pilot), egg orchard (a chicken farm), eggs Benedict, egg on, rotten egg, a bad egg, a good egg, go lay an egg, egg in one's face, egg in your beer, kill the goose that laid the golden egg, put all one's eggs in one basket, have an egg in the nest. After all that, can there be anything else to associate with eggs? How about an Egg Canyon?
Yes, there is one, and it is located in the Escalante. And like the eggs above, this egg is full of surprises and variety. This easy hike leads to a landscape of a type not seen elsewhere in the area. Do not expect huge vertical walls in Egg Canyon, but do expect huge colorful hills and a narrow defile carved in Chinle Formation mudstones and siltstones. Also, you will hike through what is arguably the finest petrified forest in the area.
The route starts in the Lamp Stand area near the northern end of the Circle Cliffs Basin and goes down Egg Canyon to The Gulch. An unnamed canyon and an old mining track take you back to the trailhead. A digression leads up a side canyon to Lamanite Arch.
Down Egg Canyon
(Lamp Stand map and Map Forty-one.) From the parking area follow a mining track south-southeast. After four minutes the track divides just before it crosses a wash. Go left (SW). The track goes up a steep hill, dividing twice along the way. Stay to the right at both junctions. You are in the Chinle Formation.
After topping the hill, continue along the track for 100 yards. Look south. Locate a small arch high on a Wingate escarpment. The canyon to its right marks the return route. To the right of the canyon is another Wingate escarpment and to its right is a wide U-shaped pass formed from the pink sands of the Chinle Formation. This "Pink Pass" marks the head of Egg Canyon.
Follow a mining track until you are below the Pink Pass. (There are a couple of mining tracks in the area. Take your pick.) Leave the track, scramble over the pass, and descend through a superb petrified