Canyon is difficult. Pay close attention to your map. (Map Four.) Forty minutes downcanyon the rivergoing south-southeastruns straight into a huge, vertical, distinctive gray wall and turns left (E). Ten minutes below the wall locate a large triangular-shaped overhang on river right that is about 100 feet above the river. A smaller overhang is to its left. You will leave the river here. The next reliable water source is about six hours away, at Sand Creek. Load up with water before leaving the river. (1.0 hour.)
Digression: You can leave the standard route here and continue down the Escalante River to the Highway 12 bridge. (See the Highway 12 Road Section for directions to this trailhead.) It takes 2.0-3.0 hours.
The exit route
Go north up and over a low ridge that is directly across the river from the triangular-shaped overhang. Enter a sand-floored drainage lined with ponderosa pines. (The drainage is shown to the southeast of elevation 6084. The mouth of the drainage is immediately east of a marked 5400' elevation line. You cannot enter the drainage directly from the river due to a pour-off.) This exit route is also used in Part 2 of Hike #4.
At the upper end of the drainage is a long black streak that goes down the sloping white Navajo slickrock into a pond. Follow the drainage delineated by the black streak (N). Pass a couple of slickrock-falls (Class 3) on the right (LUC). The drainage flattens a bit and ends in a sandy area below a gentle slickrock hill. A twenty-foot pinnacle is plainly visible near the top of a hill to the west.
Walk northeast for three minutes and intersect a small, northwest-running, ponderosa-lined canyon (shown to the east of elevation 6084). Many of the trees are dead. Follow the left (LUC) (SW) side of the canyon. In a couple of minutes the canyon divides. Follow the rim of the drainage to the left (NNW). This short canyon/gully ends at a sandy hill. Continue north-northwest across the sand for a couple of hundred yards and intersect the well-worn Bowington road (a trail) just before reaching slickrock. (0.5-1.0 hours.)
Along the Bowington road to the Boulder Mail Trail
Go left (W) on the Bowington road. It is heavily used by horse packers and its course is easy to follow; there are deep ruts as it runs along sandy sections and it is adequately cairned crossing the slickrock. The trail first goes generally northwest across slickrock for a mile, then turns north and winds around domes and along short escarpments. It takes about 1.5 hours of steady uphill hiking to reach Slickrock Saddle Bench, which is in the Carmel Formation.
The gradient eases as you continue north for an hour on Slick-