You will be better off finding high ground to the east and going over the heads of the washes and canyons. Near the tower you can see the red-and-white-banded Navajo slickrock slab you descended earlier. Follow upper Phipps Wash to the trailhead. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
Part 2: To the Escalante River
(Calf Creek map.) Start at the base of the trail to Phipps Arch. Fifteen minutes downcanyon a side canyon comes in on the left (W).
Digression: This narrow tree-lined canyon contains Maverick Natural Bridge. (The bridge is incorrectly marked on the Calf Creek map. It is located in a west-running side canyon that starts between "Phipps" and "Wash.") (0.5 hours round-trip.)
It takes another thirty minutes to reach the Escalante River. There is good camping in the area. (1.0 hours.)
To Deer Canyon
Follow a trail downcanyon along the right side of the river until it encounters a wall, which forces you to cross. Deer Canyon (LKA) comes in on the left (NW) in ten minutes. There is good camping in the vicinity. (Deer Canyon is not named on the map. It contains the labeled Bowington Arch. Do not confuse Deer Canyon with Deer Creek.) (0.5 hours.)
Digression: A path leads northwest up Deer Canyon. This is the type of hidden canyon Zane Grey was so enamored with in his western adventuresa pastoral, spring-lined glen filled with slender pinnacles, imposing towers, huge alcoves, and an abundance of cottonwoods. Pass a large pool and a lush hanging garden on its left side. Above the pool the canyon divides. Stay on the path as it enters the canyon to the left (W). After passing an indent in the wall that is to the left, the trail enters a short side canyon to the left (W). Bowington Arch is visible at the head of the canyon. (1.0-1.5 hours round-trip.)
Out of Escalante Canyon
From the mouth of Deer Canyon go down the Escalante River for two minutes and cross. You will exit the canyon here. Water is not available until back at the trailhead. Load up here.
Hike south-southeast to the foot of the Kayenta cliff. Locate a short section of constructed cattle trail built with logs. This is the only possible way up the cliff in this vicinity. You may have to do some scouting along the wall to find this break. The cattle trail ends in a shallow drainage at the top of the first short cliff. (The drainage is to the north-northeast of elevation 5682). Look southwest. The