signed "Trailhead Parking" to the right (W). There is a trail register and limited camping. You are at a sharp bend in the road between a labeled cliff dwelling and a corral. You are in the Kayenta Formation.
10.3
The Gulch is to the right. You are now in Long Canyon.
10.6
Bridge crossing The Gulch. You are in Wingate Sandstone. As you drive up Long Canyon you will enter the colorful hills of the Chinle Formation.
15.8
(Steep Creek Bench map.) The canyon to the left (N) is Upper Long Canyon. (It starts just as you go off the Steep Creek Bench map.)
Digression: A delightful route goes up colorful Upper Long Canyon. The first section is easy, as it goes along the canyon floor. (Lamp Stand map.) The middle section gets tougher, with boulder hopping and minor bush bashing. The upper section, after you enter the Wingate, narrows into a slot. One move up a short chimney (Class 5.2, 10') is the crux. Above, the canyon stays narrow and near the top it divides. Go right, to the edge of an escarpment, which provides inspiring views of the Circle Cliffs, Henry Mountains, Navajo Mountain, and the Kaiparowits Plateau. (4.0-6.0 hours round-trip.)
16.7
(Lamp Stand map.) You are on the top of a hill at the Long Canyon Overlook sign. The long escarpment of red Wingate Sandstone in the distance (NE) is the Circle Cliffs. The Henry Mountains are in the far background.
18.4
"Tee" A sign for the road to the right (SSW) starts with "Capitol Reef 11 mi."; listed below are Horse Canyon, Wolverine Canyon, and Little Death Hollow. This road provides access to Hike #33. See the Wolverine Loop roadthe Western Entrance for details.
19.5
The small wash you cross is Horse Canyon. You are in the Moenkopi Formation.
21.8
"Tee." The first signed road to the Lamp Stand is to the left (NE). This road provides access to Hike #34. See the Lamp Stand Road Section for details.
22.5
Cattle guard.
24.2
"Tee." The second signed road to the Lamp Stand is to the left (NNW). You are on White Canyon Flat.
27.6
(Bitter Creek Divide map.) Through the Studhorse Peaks. The name comes from stud horses that stood high on the slopes of the peak while guarding their mares.
27.8
Cattle guard.