Part 1: Down Harris Wash
(Red Breaks map and Map Sixteen.) From the trail register, walk down the road through a tunnel of Russian-olive trees to Harris Wash. These trees, with their silvery leaves and thorn-studded branches, are not related to olive trees but to oleasters. Russian-olives were introduced from Russia as an ornamental shade tree in the late 1800s. Like tamarisks, they quickly spread along watercourses throughout the Southwest.
Harris Wash, wide and dry in its upper reaches, quickly enters Navajo Sandstone and slowly narrows as you head downcanyon. An old track makes the walking easy. By the time you reach a hiker's maze through a fence the wash has become a splendid canyon. Cattle were the bane of Harris Wash until 1992 when the canyon below the fence was closed to grazing. Although cow pies and other cattle signs still exist, the canyon has started to recover from its 100 years of abuse.
Below the fence a riparian habitat develops and water starts flowing. A Glen Canyon National Recreation Area boundary sign a mile downcanyon gives you the opportunity to orient yourself on the map. (The boundary is shown by a heavy red vertical line to the west of elevation 5054.) A short side canyon to the left (N) is worth a visit.
Historical note: Downcanyon you will see many caves along south-facing walls. Fremont Indians used these caves during the Pueblo II and Pueblo III periods (A.D. 900 to 1200). Unlike the Fremont sites near the town of Escalante, which were permanent settlements, these were transitory camps, used seasonally to escape harsh winters and during the summer months for growing corn, beans, and squash. Round masonry structures in several caves were used to store produce. Alluvial deposits that once provided fertile platforms for growing crops have eroded, leaving the creekbed ten to twenty feet lower than during the period of Indian occupation. The Indians chipped rows of steps up the steep walls of the canyon to simplify getting to the benchlands where they hunted deer and bighorn sheep. Fun to view from a distance, the steps have been worn by the elements and are dangerous to climb.
Three major side canyons come in on the right (LDC) as you work downcanyon. Your goal is to exit Harris Wash between the second and third canyons, so do keep track of your progress. The first is a short canyon on the right (SE) immediately before a "gate"the narrowest part of Harris Wash. (It is located at the "H" in Harris.) (2.0-2.5 hours.)
The second canyon coming in on the right (SSW) has two forks divided by a massive prow. (It is at the "1" in Jeep Trail.) You are now nearly off the Red Breaks map.) (2.0-2.5 hours.)