becomes visible to the southeast. Walk toward the small peak that is on Navajo Mountain's left (N) side.
The high point is difficult to identify. There are several small knobs and domes that are all about the same elevation. The true high point has a small cairn on its summit and the name KIRSTEIN is inscribed on the rock below it. You may have to check several possible high points before you find the correct one. (2.5-3.5 hours.)
From KIRSTEIN, go east for a short distance and descend a steep slab into a steep south-running drainage. The drainage leads down to an expanse of slickrock below a cliff. There are several large potholes and excellent camping sites in the area. (0.5 hours.)
Digression: To get to the lake, walk south and descend very steep slickrock (Class 4-). You may have to do some scouting to find the easiest route. There is fine camping at the lake.
To Cottonwood Gulch
Return to KIRSTEIN, then hike west-northwest to the rim of Cottonwood Gulch. Follow its rim upcanyon to the first obvious break in the canyon wall, a wide bowl (located one-eighth mile east of elevation 3997). A constructed cattle trail in the bowl takes you into Cottonwood Gulch, which was named by the USGS in 1951. (3.5-5.0 hours.)
Cottonwood Gulch
Immediately downcanyon are three large caves on the left. Rock climbers can have fun ascending Moqui steps into two of the caves. Water starts flowing a short distance downcanyon and there is good camping in the area. Lake Powell is a half-hour walk. There is much to see and explore in this canyon. (1.0 hour.)
Exit Cottonwood Gulch
Return to the foot of the cattle trail near the three large caves and proceed upcanyon for a couple of minutes. Rock climbers can duck into a scenic slot on the right and follow it up the canyon (Class 5.2, 10'). Others can hike up a brush-covered hillside to the left (LUC) of the slot and reenter the canyon in a quarter mile.
In fifteen minutes the canyon divides. Exit the canyon here by going southwest up a steep hill between the two forks of the canyon (over elevation 4312T) (Class 3 +). (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Digression: Both forks of the canyon contain impressive narrows.
Back to the trailhead
Hike to the foot of Sixty Point and follow the cattle trail back to the trailhead. (2.5-4.0 hours.)