forced O'roöndates to tackle a series of dangers and difficulties before allowing him to take her hand. For many a year O'roöndates toiled on, with thoughts of Stati'ra's charms propelling him, until at last the hardships ended and she had to accept him as her husband. Like O'roöndates, you will have to overcome a series of difficulties in the flowing waters of Deer Creek in order to possess the beauty you are seeking.
The route starts on the Burr Trail and goes down Deer Creek to the Escalante River. It is followed downcanyon for a short distance. A cattle trail exit leads to a day-long stretch of walking superb slickrock under a remarkable dome-topped escarpment, which you follow back to the trailhead.
Along Deer Creek
(King Bench map and Map Thirty-nine.) From the trailhead locate a path that goes along the right (W) side of Deer Creek. It is easy to follow for the first two miles. The route then cuts up onto slickrock and crosses a couple of small side canyons before returning to the rim of Deer Creek. Cairns mark the route through this section. Follow the trail until Durffey Mesa, a Navajo escarpment on the right (W), forces you down to the creekbed (one-eighth mile east-northeast of the "a" in Durffey Mesa). Do not make the mistake of dropping into the canyon too soon or you will have to contend with thick vegetation. (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Down Deer Creek
The crux of the route lies ahead and consists of many miles of wading and thrashing through long stretches of willows. The dominant trees are boxelders, with leaves that have irregularly notched teeth arranged in clumps of three, and dogwoods with their purplish bark. Small groups will find plenty of campsites in this section, but large groups will have problems. Watch for a couple of rows of Moqui steps and two constructed cattle trails that exit the canyon on the left (LDC). They provide access to the rim and good camping.
A couple of hundred yards before you reach Boulder Creek, which enters on the right (W), is a large patch of poison ivy. Boulder Creek is the first side canyon to enter Deer Creek. You will not miss it. There is excellent camping in the area. (3.5-5.5 hours.)
Down Boulder Creek
Below the confluence of Deer and Boulder creeks the united canyons are called Boulder Creek. The route downcanyon now consists of long stretches of slickrock walking interspersed with areas of willow bashing and wading. In an hour, after passing an old USGS water-gaging station that is on the right side of the creek, you reach