Historical note: The canyon was named for Llewellyn Harris, for whom Harris Wash was also named. Harris ran cattle near the mouth of the Escalante River.
Before the Colorado River was dammed, river runners found an inscription in a cave that read: L. Harris April 24 1894. Arthur Chaffin, a river runner and Glen Canyon explorer, recounted a story about Llewellyn Harris to explorer Harry Aleson. Apparently a friend of his, gold miner Jack Butler, lent a burro to Harris, who used it on a trip into the Waterpocket Fold country. Caught in a snowstorm, Harris camped in a large cave for six weeks and ended up eating the burro. When asked about Llewellyn Harris years later, Butler told Chaffin: "That's the son-of-a-bitch that ate my burro!" The veracity of the story is not known.
Down Llewellyn Gulch
As you follow the wash down, it quickly turns into a narrow Navajo defile. There are several drops to negotiate (Class 5.4, 15'). All of them can be adequately belayed or hand lines can be used. These are some of the finest narrows in the Escalante area. The short side canyons you pass are worth exploring.
The canyon widens and water and large cottonwoods appear. Look for a thin arch on a wall to the right (LDC) (one-quarter mile west-northwest of elevation 3940). Go around the corner below the arch. A steep slope to the right (W) is the exit route. There is good camping in the area. (2.0-4.0 hours.)
Digression: A stroll down to the lake is rewarding. Depending on the water level of the lake, there may be good camping near it. (2.0-3.0 hours round-trip.)
Rock climber's note: Those wishing to exit the canyon on the left (LDC)(N) and return to the trailhead on a cross-country route over endless expanses of slickrock can do so. Twenty minutes downcanyon from the arch find two large overhangs divided by a steep prow. The prow is the only likely looking exit out of the canyon. Though the route is not technically difficult (Class 5.0, 100'), there is horrendous exposure.
To Lake Powell
Exit Llewellyn Gulch via the steep slope to the right (W) below the arch. Note the constructed section of an old cattle trail as you hike through the first band of Navajo Sandstone. Make your way southeast to the rim of the canyon. (0.5 hours.)
You are now in a harsh, barren wonderland of Navajo slickrock, domes, and small washes. The goal is to hike generally southeast to the highest point in the area (labeled as U76 or elevation 4535). As you work your way upward, the rounded bulk of Navajo Mountain