The Strata
by Tom Messenger and Steve Allen
. . . the surface was diversified by columns, spires, castles, and battlemented towers of colossal but often beautiful proportions, closely resembling elaborate structures of art, but in effect far surpassing the most imposing monuments of human skill.

John S. Newberry, 1860
The formations detailed below are listed in order of age, from the oldest or lowest stratum to the youngest or highest stratum. Only the dominant formations found in the Escalante area are described. Other rock types and even other formations may be present elsewhere on the Colorado Plateau in the same time interval.
A formation is a mappable unit: a body of rock with distinctive features that can be recognized in the field with a magnifying glass. Most of the formations under discussion show a marked contrast in rock type and color with the units immediately above and below and can be easily identified from a distance. If a formation is dominated by a single rock type, that is reflected in its namee.g., Wingate Sandstone or Navajo Sandstone. For more varied conglomerate rock structures such as the Chinle Formation, the noncommittal word "formation" is used. The rocks discussed here were deposited from about 250 to 170 million years ago.
In the Escalante region, the Moenkopi Formation is found only in the Circle Cliffs on the east side of Escalante Canyon. It is horizontal-bedded and is up to 500 feet thick. It was formed when streamborne silt and mud were deposited on floodplains or in tidal pools and mud flats on the edge of a shallow sea to the west. A layer of limestone containing fragments of ancient clams and snails records an interval when the shoreline lay farther east. The layers vary considerably in color, ranging from near white to red, yellow, brown, and dark brown. The Moenkopi Formation has been characterized as looking like a chocolate torte cake. It forms ledgy cliffs and steep slopes.
The Chinle Formation is horizontal-bedded and is up to 700 feet thick. It is found in the Circle Cliffs and along the lower Escalante River. The Chinle Formation was formed by streams depositing sand, gravel, mud, and silt in alluvial plains and river channels.
While this deposition was proceeding, wind carried in ash from volcanic eruptions to the southwest. As deposition continued, groundwater altered the ash to the clay mineral bentonite and dissolved uranium from the ash. Layers rich in bentonite weather to the frothy surface that is often described as "popcorn." The "popcorn" is found in the Purple Hills area of the Circle Cliffs.