36.8
"Tee." Signed Dance Hall Rock track to the left (E). Dance Hall Rock was used by Hole-in-the-Rock members for dances while they were camped at Fortymile Spring. The hall, and the surrounding domes, are carved from Entrada Sandstone. The area is perfect for wandering and exploring.
37.0
Cattle guard.
37.5
"Tee." Signed "40 Mile Spring" track to the left (E). A spring, nestled in an Entrada Sandstone bowl, is 1.1 miles down the track.
The Hole-in-the-Rock expedition, finding the best water they had encountered since leaving Escalante at Fortymile Spring, tarried here for three weeks while a scouting party explored the route ahead. This pause in the trek allowed new members to catch up to the main group. Boredom was relieved by hiking up the wash to Dance Hall Rock. Forage for livestock was a major problem and pastures ranging from the Escalante River to the base of the Straight Cliffs were sought out.
The road ahead, as you will see, became much harder to negotiate. Large washes and deep draws hindered progress. Trip member Platte DeAlton Lyman wrote in his diary: "We drove 10 miles [from Fortymile Spring] over the roughest country I ever saw a wagon go over and camped at the 50 mile spring."
39.5
Signed Carcass Wash. A monument on the right tells the story of a tragedy that occurred here in June 1963. A group of Explorer Scouts from Salt Lake City were being shuttled to the Hole-in-the-Rock, where they were to take a river trip through Glen Canyon. The truck they were in lost control and rolled down the hill. Thirteen young men lost their lives and twenty-six were injured in the accident.
40.6
Start of Fortymile Creek and Willow Gulch Hike #24. Signed Sooner Wash. A vague track to the right provides parking. You are at elevation 4265 and are in Entrada Sandstone.
40.8
"Tee." Track to the right (W) goes to the Sooner Rocks. The Sooner Rocks, Sooner Bench, and Sooner Slide were named for a young homesick sheepherder who said he would "sooner be home than out in this forsaken region."
41.5
"Tee." Track to the left (ESE) goes to the Willow Gulch trailhead. This trailhead provides the shortest access to Willow Gulch and Broken Bow Arch. The trailhead is located at the end of a road that starts at elevation 4323. The track is suitable for high-clearance vehicles and is 1.4 miles long. It ends at a turnaround and parking area.
Follow a path north down a hill past a small tower that looks like a graduation cap, or mortar board. Traverse along a sand dune