nine children, was part of the first contingent of settlers to the Escalante area in 1875.
Hurricane Wash Trailhead Road Section
Access to Coyote Gulch. 

Access is from the Hole-in-the-Rock road. 

MapBig Hollow Wash.
The signed Hurricane Wash trailhead is 33.8 miles down the Hole-in-the-Rock road and is located in a large pull-off on the right near several large tamarisk trees. (The trailhead is located one-eighth mile southeast of Willow Tank at a Jeep Trail on the Big Hollow Wash map.) There is camping at the trailhead. You are in the Carmel Formation. (See Map Fifteen.)
Digression: Hurricane Wash provides easy and popular access to lower Coyote Gulch. From the parking area, cross the road and walk east on a track along the left side of Hurricane Wash to a trail register. Now either follow the track or the wash. The domes and goblins on the left are in Entrada Sandstone. The canyon walls build slowly and it is not until you reach a Glen Canyon National Recreation Area boundary sign that the wash changes to a canyon. (King Mesa map.) Water starts flowing a short distance above the confluence with Coyote Gulch. See Hike #20 for details on exploring the rest of Coyote Gulch. (2.5-3.5 hours from the trailhead to Coyote Gulch.)
Fortymile Ridge Road Section
Access to Hikes #20 through 23. 

Access is from the Hole-in-the-Rock road. 

MapsSooner Bench and King Mesa.
The Fortymile Ridge road starts 36.1 miles down the Hole-in-the-Rock road at the "40 Mile Bench" sign (located halfway between elevations 4766 and 4727 on the Sooner Bench map) . The track is suitable for high-clearance vehicles for the first 4.0 miles. It is suitable for 4WD vehicles after that. There is limited camping along the track. (See Map Fifteen.)
0.0
At the Hole-in-the-Rock road. Go northeast.
0.6
Cattle guard.
4.0
(King Mesa map.) Start of Coyote Gulch Hike #20. "Y." The track to the left (N) goes up a short steep hill to a large stock tank and the Coyote Gulch trailhead and trail register. There is good