cluded the legendary boatman Otis "Dock" Marston; Stella Ruess, Everett's mother; and then Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater.
Georgie White may have felt a bit out of place on the Escalante River. While Harry Aleson had spent a considerable amount of time exploring Glen Canyon and its tributaries, this was Georgie's first trip away from her first love, the Grand Canyon. Georgie de Ross was born in Chicago in 1911. After she married Harold White, the restless couple bicycled from New York to California in 1936, a remarkable feat at the time. During the war, Georgie joined the Women's Auxiliary Flying Squadron. In 1944 her daughter Sommona died in a bicycle accident. Devastated by the death, Georgie turned to the outdoor world for solace, joining the Sierra Club and participating in many of its outings.
In 1945 Georgie met Harry Aleson at one of his Grand Canyon slide shows. Their first adventure together was a float trip down the lower end of the Colorado River in the Grand Canyonwithout a boat. The couple wore life vests and swam for eighty miles to Lake Mead.
Even with their butt-bumping start, Harry and Georgie decided to continue down the Escalante River. Aleson wrote: "The second day was tougher than the firstso the thirdso the fourth. We battled the rocky, shallow places; many, many fast chutes of white water. We portaged many times."
On the fourth day their raft hit a boulder and flipped. Now in the water with their gear floating down the fast-moving river, Aleson and White "scrambled about in the churning water, hugging and puffing, choking, coughing, gagging, . . . grabbing things drifting by . . . We repacked, reloaded, and went on." Seven days from the start Harry Aleson and Georgie White finally reached the mouth of the Escalante River at Glen Canyon. Another day was spent on the Colorado River floating to their takeout point at Lee's Ferry.
A week after the trip, Harry wrote his friend Lou Fetzner: "I hereby predict that the Escalante Creek (?) run will be repeated but once in our lifetimes, and that only if you and I make it in 1949, for movies." Aleson and Fetzner did make that second trip, over eight days in late May 1949.
Aleson's third and final trip down the Escalante River was in June 1950. Instead of starting at the Highway 12 bridge, the third expedition began at the mouth of Harris Wash. It is interesting now to note that the group drove down Harris Wash to the river. Aleson was joined on this trip by Randall and Cyria Henderson, Georgie White, and Charles Lindsay.
Randall Henderson was the publisher of Desert Magazine. After the trip Henderson wrote an article about their adventures. In it he said: "We shoved out into the currentand 50 yards downstream