joins the trail at the interface between the Kayenta and Navajo. Follow the trail and pipe to a stock tank. You are now on Big Bown Bench. (0.5 hours.)
Historical note: Big Bown Bench was named for William Bown, a rancher who ran cattle and sheep in the area.
Across Big Bown Bench
You will notice a black rubber pipe going east from the stock tank. Follow it to the top of a hill, across a wide shallow valley, to the crest of another hill, and into a shallow canyon (shown one-quarter mile east of elevation 5626T on the Silver Falls Bench map). Drop into the canyon and follow it south. There are a couple of medium potholes in the canyon. A small side canyon comes in from the left (NE) just before a fall (shown to the west of elevation 5594T). There is a medium pothole above the fall. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Go southeast across a flat plain. The goal is to cross the top of the next side canyon that comes up from the Escalante River (shown to the west of elevation 5 32 IT). This canyon has no water. You have now entered Glen Canyon National Recreation Area.
Rock climber's note: A route into this canyon can be followed to the Escalante River. Follow the left (LDC)(E) rim of the canyon south for a couple of hundred yards past a large, level slickrock slab to the only likely looking descent route. Downclimb a couple of short walls (Class 5.0, 15'), then zigzag down ledges into the canyon. Note the line of Moqui steps near the top of the cliff. Follow the canyon down to the Escalante River.
To return, go up a Kayenta prow to the north (toward elevation 5217T) on a constructed cattle trail. This will take you to the top. Follow the rim of the canyon back to the start. (2.0-3.0 hours.)
Proceed south into an area of Navajo domes and intersect a wash going southwest (shown to the west of elevation 5356T). Follow it down a long stretch of shallow narrows until you are near the rim of a canyon. The farther down you go, the more likely you are to find small potholes (0.5-1.0 hour.)
Exit the canyon to the left (LDC)(E) (the exact point you exit is not important) and go southeast across broken ground to the rim of Silver Falls Creek. It is difficult to find the descent route, which starts at Cliff Spring (shown on the map). (0.5 hours.)
Into Silver Falls Creek
Assuming you have intersected the rim of Silver Falls Creek south of the spring, follow the rim upcanyon. Stay near its edge. You are on Navajo slickrock and the spring is at the interface between the