Mission members were anxious to head for the San Juan townsite as quickly as possible in order to have enough time to prepare for spring planting. Expecting the trek to take six weeks, the October 1879 start did not seem too late in the season. Many small groups of settlers were instructed to meet in the desert east of Escalante. A good wagon road had been established as far as Tenmile Spring, which is in Harris Wash. This was to be the first camp of the trek. Because of a scarcity of feed for their animals, some of the late arriving settlers went down Harris Wash to the Harris Ranch on the Escalante River.
The pace of the expedition slowed after the wagon road ended. Cattle trails were followed, but considerable energy was required to cross the many small washes along the route. Twentymile Spring (now called Collett Wash) was the second camp, and Coyote Holes was the third. Each camp was about a day's journey, or ten miles, apart. Water and feed were problematic, but the expedition proceeded smoothly.
The fourth camp was at Fortymile Spring near Dance Hall Rock. This was the eventual meeting place for all the settlers. Wagons started to assemble there in mid-November. By the time the whole entourage had gathered, it consisted of 250 settlers, 1,800 head of livestock, and eighty-three wagons.
Trip leaders soon realized that the explorations by Hall, Schow, and Collett of the country to the east had not been thorough. An easy traverse of the Colorado River could not be found. In trouble, the expedition ground to a halt even as more settlers arrived.
Several scouting parties were sent out, but all found the country nearly impassable. Unfortunately, the trail back to the town of Escalante was now snowed in. Though retreat was considered, it was not thought to be a viable option. The wagons could not make it through the snow and the livestock most likely would be lost as well The Hole-in-the-Rock route was chosen simply because it was the lesser of many evils.
From Fortymile Spring to Fiftymile Spring the going was exceptionally difficult. Unfamiliar with side-cuts and switchbacks, the pioneers excavated dugways across washes and small canyons.
The group divided at Fiftymile Spring. Those working to widen the Hole-in-the-Rock for passage moved close to the canyon edge. The others stayed near the spring. A smaller group was sent across the river to prepare a long dugway out of Glen Canyon into Cottonwood Canyon.
For two months the settlers worked at building the road down to the river. The obstacles were enormous. The first section of the Hole-in-the-Rock was a vertical fifty-foot-tall solid rock slit too thin for a man to squeeze through. During initial construction, the men