easily. Use of rappel rings is critical here. I was descending a slot in Dirty Devil country, leaving ropes at each drop. Near the end of the day I was careless with my anchor on a long rappel, setting it too far back in the slot. Once down, I was unable to pull the ropes. The rappel had been down a narrow, twisting, smooth-walled chimney that my body could barely fit through. Reversing the route by using mechanical ascenders was nearly impossible. With almost no room to maneuver, it took me several hours of cursing and cramping to ascend the crack.
Entry into deep water from a rappel can be tricky and dangerous. The problem is in unclipping from the ropes while floating in turbulent water or being bombarded by falling water. The standard canyoneering technique is to lock your carabiners as usual at the start of the rappel. When you are close to the pool at the bottom of the rappel, stop, unscrew the threaded portion of the carabiners, then enter the water. This ensures that you will not be struggling in the water trying to unscrew a jammed or overtightened lock sleeve. Do make sure your rappel device is properly leashed so you will not lose it in a deep pool.
Jumping into deep pools sometimes seems the easiest way to descend a drop. I've been through slots with "experienced" canyoneers who blithely jumped into water of indeterminate depth and with possible obstructions lurking just under the surface. The first person down should always descend on a rope to check water depth and to see if there are hidden logs or other obstacles.
Groups have gotten into trouble in technical slots due to the inexperience of their leader, and deaths have resulted. There is a vast difference between going down a technical canyon with a peera person who has the same skills as oneselfand leading a group of novices. Trip leaders must recognize this. It is the leader who is responsible for watching everyone else in the group, for making sure things go smoothly, and for coordinating pack lowerings and rappels. The leader must be capable of recognizing and dealing with any and all hazardous situations that might arise. At all times he or she must be thinking about the safety of the group.
Equipment needs vary depending on the type of slot. Since most slots entail going downcanyon, ropes are most commonly used for rappels. Nine-millimeter climbing or static ropes work well. Dry ropes are preferred. Be careful when using ropes: they are easily abraded, cut, and ruined in the slots. Always carry an extra rope. It should be used for belays and can replace a trashed rope. Also, the extra rope can be cut up and used in place of sling material if you are desperate. Sometimes sling instead of rope can be left at short drops if the wall is less than vertical and you know you can