ways available in Sand Creek and Death Hollow. Mamie Creek has medium potholes.
Maps:
Boulder Town, Calf Creek, and Escalante. The Trails Illustrated map "Canyons of the Escalante" does a good job of showing the Boulder Mail Trail in its entirety.
Skill level:
Moderate route finding. Class 2 walking. There may be a short stretch of wading in Death Hollow if water levels are high. This is a moderate hike with substantial elevation gain and loss. Low-impact camping skills are essential.
Special equipment:
Wading shoes or boots.
Note:
Poison ivy is unavoidable in Death Hollow. Be prepared.
Land status:
This route is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
Although the Boulder Mail Trail (BMT) does not form a loop, it is one of canyon country's premier routes. Easy walking along an established trail, adequate water sources, the incredible canyon of Death Hollow, and a picturesque natural bridge in Mamie Creek combine to make this hike a memorable experience.
By using the information in Hikes #1, 2, and 3 several loop trips can be devised. One suggestion is to follow the BMT into Death Hollow, descend Death Hollow to the Escalante River, and use the Bowington road to return to the BMT. Another is to hike down the Escalante River from the upper Escalante Canyon trailhead, exit at the Bowington road, and return to the start via the BMT.
The BMT starts near Highway 12, crosses Sand Creek, goes over Slickrock Saddle Bench, and drops into Death Hollow. It then goes down Death Hollow for a short distance, exits it, and crosses Mamie Creek and Antone Flats on its way to the upper Escalante Canyon trailhead near the town of Escalante.
To Sand Creek
(Boulder Town map and Map Two.) Hike southwest down the road for twenty minutes to a "Boulder Mail Trail" sign, which points to a closed track on the right (SW). (Calf Creek map.) Follow the track for five minutes. Look for several stacks of cairns on the left. They mark where the BMT leaves the track. Follow the cairned trail down small cliffs and across sand and slickrock to Sand Creek. There is good camping in the area. The first part of this hike is ideal for those with young children. (1.0-1.5 hours.)