Alternate route: You can bypass the obstacle by walking along the left (LDC) rim for ten minutes to a steep slope that drops back into the canyon.
You are now in a stretch of neverending narrows. As you wind downcanyon look for a fifteen-foot pinnacle with a sloping "hat" on its summit that is 100 feet above the canyon floor on the right. The exit route out of the canyon is a minute below the pinnacle and goes up a slab dotted with worn Moqui steps on the left (NE). (Map Thirty-five.) (The exit is immediately southwest of elevation 4147T.) (If you go too far downcanyon you will intersect a slot that enters the canyon at wash level on the right (W). It is shown to the north of elevation 406 IT. Backtrack for ten minutes.) You will return to this exit route after a visit to the lake to obtain water.
Rock climber's note: This first slot is a joy to explore. There are many obstacles to work around. A white chockstone ten feet off the ground will stop most.
Continue downcanyon to the lake. Due to the flash-flood potential, you will have to exit the canyon at the Moqui steps before camping. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
The exit route
Backtrack to the Moqui-step exit route. (This is the first possible exit on the right (LUC) as you walk upcanyon.) Although the slab looks intimidating, the steps ease the difficulty (Class 5.2, 40'). At the top of the first slab, cut left (NW) under a cliff band for 100 yards, then exit the canyon on steep slickrock to the southeast (Class 4). A steep slickrock gully to the southeast of elevation 4147T contains medium potholes.
To Lake Powell
At the top of the slickrock look southeast. Your goal is to round the south end of Sixty Point. It is easiest to hike northeast to a cattle trail near the base of the escarpment. At the tip of the peninsula you will be between the cliff to the north and a wide V-shaped cut above the lake (at elevation 4241) to the south. (1.5-2.0 hours.)
Hike northeast parallel to Sixty Point for ten minutes. You may see a witness post/survey marker (elevation 4298T).
Digression: You can easily get to the lake from here. Simply go east down steep slickrock. There are large potholes and an excellent camping site near the lake (one-eighth mile north of elevation 3900T). (1.5 hours round-trip.)