Historical note: Kaiparowits is a Piute word meaning "Big Mountain's Little Brother," referring to Navajo Mountain to the east. Although the name is now used to refer to the whole plateau, the Piutes used it to demarcate a small area of elevation near its north end. They called the whole plateau Miepakivav, or "mountain lying down." The Kaiparowits Plateau was inhabited by Kayenta and Virgin River Anasazi, with light use by the Fremont, during the Pueblo II and Pueblo III periods (A.D. 900 to 1275). In the 1800s and early 1900s, Navajo, Piute, and Ute Indians used the plateau for hunting and grazing. Early ranchers tell of a large lake, which is now just a shallow pond, on the plateau.
Hike generally southeast along Fiftymile Bench, over or across several ravines, and across the top of the bay onto the long, south-running Sixty Point. (It starts at elevation 6012T on the Nasja Mesa map.) Cattle trails make progress easy. Hole-in-the-Rock Arch on Fiftymile Point is visible to the northeast (near elevation 5944T). (1.0 hour.)
Digression: A short walk to the arch proves interesting. From the arch you can see Bement Arch deep in Davis Gulch, the old Holein-the-Rock airstrip, and the now abandoned Clear Creek Trail. (1.0 hour round-trip.)
Note: The long peninsula you are walking on has never had a formal name. Harry Aleson, in a letter to Otis "Dock" Marston in 1952, called it Sixty Point, a name I have used throughout this guide. It refers not to a specific spot but to the whole peninsula.
Hike south along the peninsula. Keep tabs of progress on your map. In about thirty minutes you will see a cone-shaped hill (elevation 5921T) in the middle of the peninsula. From the hill go right (SW) for a couple of minutes, then drop into a steep drainage that goes southeast. This drainage contains a spring with water that is hard enough to keep you hopping for a week. Avoid drinking it. The drainage ends at a high drop into Twilight Canyon. There is sublime, albeit dry, camping with wonderful views of Navajo Mountain and Lake Powell on a ledge to the left of the drop. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Into Twilight Canyon
At the drop is an impossibly steep dirt slide that goes to the canyon floor. Do not go down the slide. (If you do go down it, there are overwhelming obstacles below.) Instead, head the canyon and follow its right rim, which presents itself as a steep, narrow crest of dirt. Hike south along the ridge, which is loose, difficult, and has an abundance of exposure. Take your time! A line of towers blocks the ridge