the Highway 12 bridge. This is a pleasant stroll. (1.5-2.5 hours one way.)
77.5
Start of Upper Boulder Creek and Dry Hollow Hike #6. Small parking area on the right. You are one-eighth mile west-southwest of elevation 5863 and are in Navajo Sandstone.
79.1
Start of a section of the highway called the Hogback. Calf Creek is to the left (W) and Dry Hollow is to the right (E).
80.0
Start of a section of the highway called New Home Bench. Early settlers to Boulder wanted to build homes on this bench but a planned aqueduct proved to be unfeasible and the idea was dropped.
81.4
Track to the left (W) goes a couple of hundred yards to the Upper Calf Creek Falls trailhead. Be careful of the deep sand at the parking circle at the end of the track. There is a trail register and good camping. You are just south of the "e" in Home and are in Navajo Sandstone.
Digression: A popular hike starts here. Simply follow a heavily cairned trail down a steep slope to Upper Calf Creek Falls. There is a lot to explore. This area has become impacted by careless hikers. Stay on the trails! (2.0-3.0 hours round-trip.)
83.3
(Boulder Town map.) Track to the left (SW) goes to the Boulder Mail Trail trailhead, which provides access to Hike #3.
Side track to Boulder Mail Trail trailhead and Hike #3
0.0
At Highway 12. Follow the track southwest. This track is suitable for high clearance vehicles.
0.4
"Tee." The Boulder Airstrip and UFO Landing Site is straight ahead. Go left (S).
0.5
Start of Boulder Mail Trail Hike #3. Signed Boulder Mail Trail trailhead. There is a trail register and good camping. You are at the "1" of the Jeep Trail shown just south of the landing strip on the Boulder Town map and are on Navajo Sandstone.
End of side track
84.0
Signed Hells Backbone road to the left (W). This road provides access to Hikes #1 and 2. See the Hells Backbone Road Section for details. (You are one-quarter mile north-northeast of elevation 6776.)
85.1
Enter the town of Boulder.
87.1
Signed Burr Trail (a road) to the right (E). This road provides ac-