The Geology of the Escalante Region
by Tom Messenger and Steve Allen
The shifting sands! Slowly they move, wave upon wave, drift upon drift; but by day and by night they gather, gather, gather They overwhelm, they bury, they destroy, and then a spirit of restlessness seizes them and they move off elsewhere, swirl upon swirl, line upon line, in serpentine windings that enfold some new growth or fill in some new valley in waste.

John C. Van Dyke, 1901
The geology of the Escalante region is complicated. A basic understanding of how the canyons were created and a knowledge of the characteristics of the common formations will prove valuable as you follow the route descriptions. It will add insight and increase your sensitivity while hiking in the area.
Most of the rocks in the Escalante area are sedimentary. Sedimentary rocks are most commonly composed of fragments (mainly silica) that weathered from surrounding highlands. Geologists call these fragments clastic particles. Volcanic ash is another source of clastic particles. Some sediments, such as limestone and gypsum, are biological or chemical precipitates in seas or lakes.
As the clastic particles were swept down from the highlands by wind and water, the environments into which the material was deposited varied. The source of the particles, the length of deposition, and the depositional environmenta lake, sea, tidal flat, or dry grounddetermined the final sedimentary structures of the formation. The rocks under discussion here are of two basic types, wind deposited and water deposited.
The wind deposits are cross-bedded sandstone. Examples include Wingate Sandstone, Navajo Sandstone, Page Sandstone, and Entrada Sandstone. They strikingly preserve evidence of massive sand seas in which a large amount of material was deposited over a geologically short span of time. The climate and environment during the period of deposition was similar to that of the present-day Sahara Desert, hot and dry. Although from a distance cross-bedded sandstone appears homogeneous, it does contain layers. These layers, which are up to seventy feet thick, are inclined about twenty-five degrees to the horizontal. The layers formed on the downwind slip faces of the dunes as steady seasonal winds moved them across the landscape. The layers record the passage of successive waves of dunes.
Water deposits are represented by horizontal-bedded layers that range from paper-thin to many feet thick and include several rock types. Some layers record the deposition of fine particles of silt and clay in the quiet water of floodplains, lakes, lagoons, tidal flats, and