III

Hole-In-The-RockThe Western Escalante
The western Escalante region is bounded by Highway 12 on the north, the Escalante River on the east, Lake Powell on the south, and the Kaiparowits Plateau on the west. The Hole-in-the-Rock road cuts through the area and provides access to the many canyons that begin in the shadow of the massive Straight Cliffs. Although the region is dominated by Escalante Canyon, it is the side canyons that are the real attraction. Varying from the lush flat-floored Harris Wash and the vertiginous-walled splendor of Coyote Gulch to the narrowest of crevices like Brimstone Gulch and Egypt 3, these canyons provide canyoneers of all ability levels ample opportunities for exploration.
The lower portions of the Escalante were home to the first influx of Anasazi Indians during the late Basketmaker II period (approximately A.D. 500). Over a period of centuries they slowly made their way up the main canyon and eventually visited or occupied nearly every side canyon and small drainage in the area. Many Anasazi found the high plateau country of the Kaiparowits to their liking and it became the most densely populated region outside the San Juan River basin.
Later, Piute Indians, who subsisted on hunting and gathering, settled in the region. Starting in the mid-1800s, Navajo Indians crossed the Colorado River and herded their sheep throughout the area, leaving behind many constructed trails that backpackers still use.
The western Escalante was partially opened by the early Mormon settlers who grazed their animals on the abundant grass that used to cover the now nearly barren hills. It was not until members of the Hole-in-the-Rock expedition built a wagon road below the Straight Cliffs from Escalante to the Colorado River that the area was truly revealed.
The number of livestock that ranged the area increased dramatically, rising to a high of 20,000 head of cattle and 60,000 sheep near the turn of the century. Overgrazing became a serious problem. It was during this time when the ranchers were seeking every available morsel of feed for their animals that most of the livestock trails leading to remote benches or canyons were built. Cattlemen often said