How to Use this Guide
The only right way to get to know this country (any country), the only way, is with your body. On foot. Better yet, on hands and knees. Best of allafter scrambling to a high placeon your rump. Pick out a good spot and just sit there, not moving, for about a year (This is my own highest ambition.) Keep your eyeballs peeled and just sit there, through the hours, through the days, through the nights, through the seasonsthe freeze of winter, the stunning glare and heat of summer, the grace and glory of the spring and falland watch what happens.

Edward Abbey, 1971
To get the most out of the guide and to help you understand the terminology, read this section carefully. The guide is divided into four main chapters, each representing an area that is accessed by one of the four main roads that cuts through the region. These are the Hells Backbone road, Highway 12, the Hole-in-the-Rock road, and the Burr Trail. Each chapter is prefaced with a general overview of the area, its main features, and a short history. This is followed by a road section that describes the roads used to access the individual hikes. The road section is followed by a description of the hikes.
Caveat: A guide book cannot keep up with all the changes that are happening in the Escalante. Some roads are being upgraded; others may be closed. Trailhead locations do change and trail registers are occasionally added. Changes in the newly designated Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument are likely. Campfire, dog, group size, and other rules may also be revised. Please obey all signs. If you have questions, stop at the Interagency Office in Escalante.
Road Sections
The road sections direct you to the trailhead for each hike. The introductory paragraph tells you what type of vehicle can make it to the trailhead. Vehicle type is broken down into four categories:
Any vehicle is just that: Winnebagos, Cadillacs, cars towing trailers, etc.
Light-duty vehicles include most small cars: Toyota Corolla, Ford Taurus, Subaru, Nissan, VW Rabbit, etc.
High-clearance vehicles include Volkswagen bugs and buses, short-wheelbase vans, two-wheel-drive pickups, and mini-pickups.
Four-wheel-drive (4WD) roads are for true 4WDs, not for the smaller 4WD cars that do not have the necessary ground clearance.
Rain or snow can make any of the access roads impassable, even to 4WDs. On some roads short sections of deep sand will be