high above the canyon to avoid a couple of deep side drainages. A jutting point of slickrock (at elevation 3814T) provides access to the lake by means of a steep slickrock descent (Class 3). It may take some scouting to find the route. There is good but limited camping near the lake. (2.0-3.0 hours.)
Digression: From the water's edge look east across the lake. A steep slab behind an island leads north up to Pollywog Bench. This slab contains a variation of the Clear Creek Trail, an old constructed cattle trail. See the Historical note below for details.
To the Clear Creek Trail
Look at your map. One-half mile to the west is a short westtending inlet. Your goal is to go around the west end of the inlet, then follow its north rim east to another jutting point of slickrock. Near the end of the point pick up a cairned and constructed cattle trail that leads to a narrow defile. It will take you to the lake (southwest of the second "A" in AREA). There is good but limited camping near the lake. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Historical note: The route the cattle trail follows was first used by Anasazi Indians. Several caves near the trail were surveyed by archaeologists in 1957. They found rock shelters, storage cists, and assorted artifacts which have now been inundated by Lake Powell.
The cattle trail, which runs from the Hole-in-the-Rock road to
Halls Creek, was built in sections by three local cattlemen in the early 1900s. (Map Thirty-seven.) The first section was constructed by John Black, an Escalante and Boulder cattleman. The Black Trail started at the Hole-in-thc-Rock road and entered Escalante Canyon at this point. This section of the Black Trail is now called the Clear Creek Trail.
Robert Moore, after ascending this portion of the trail in 1955, wrote: "First we had to follow a zigzag path up a sand slope, a trail so steep that the pack horses refused time and again to start up it. Above this, the path mounts a narrow, sharply tilted ledge of slickrock in which cowboys have blasted and chipped a few crude footholds. Even when we had negotiated that precipitous incline, there were sand slopes and slickrock so steep that we had to climb afoot, leading our horses."
The Black Trail then followed the canyon floor downriver for a couple of miles and went partway out of the canyon on the left to a Kayenta bench, which is now under water. The trail followed the bench out to the Colorado River and upcanyon to the mouths of Bowns and Long canyons.
The second part of the trailfrom the east fork of Bowns Canyon to the top of the Waterpocket Foldwas constructed by William Bown. The Bowns Trail is described in Hike #23.
The third part of the trailfrom the crest of the Waterpocket