clude long stretches of cross-country hiking on benches or along rimrock.
Rugged terrain is the norm, not the exception, in the Escalante. This puts an added obligation on those hiking there. In a land with few trails, route-finding and map-reading skills are very important. On many routes, rock-climbing and rope-handling skills become paramount. For the more audacious, swimming skills may be needed while descending some of the canyons.
Several of the routes entail hiking long stretches between water sources. This may require carrying two or more gallons of water in packs that are already heavy. Those attempting the harder hikes or technical routes must be prepared both physically and mentally. Hikers must be willing to turn back if things do not go as planned.
As with any outdoor activity done far from medical help, basic CPR and first-aid skills, though rarely needed, become essential. A knowledge of both the prevention and the treatment of hyperthermia is crucial.
Thirty-seven major hikes are featured in the guide. Many short and side hikes also are described. There are hikes that will satisfy any canyoneer, from the novice to the expert. Dayhikers can choose routes from an hour to a very long day. Backpackers will find many multiday hikes. Those not satisfied with the standard hikes can use the information presented in the guide to chart their own course.
All of the hikes in the guide are designed as loops. This negates the need for tedious, time-consuming, and gas-wasting car shuttles.
One of the aggravating aspects of hiking in the Escalante is finding the trailhead. The miles of old mining roads and stock access tracks in the area can confuse even the veteran canyoneer. Fourteen main roads and several side roads are described in the Road sections. They will help ensure that time is not squandered trying to find a trailhead.
Each hike is prefaced with a brief description of the route. This includes details regarding the recommended hiking seasons, trip length, water availability, elevation range, maps, skill level needed, and special equipment required.
The route descriptions contain information on hiking time between known landmarks, side trips, and interesting route variations. Maps are included that show important water sources and routes in and out of canyon systems.
About half of the land in the Escalante is within Glen Canyon National Recreation Area and therefore has some environmental protection. With the exception of a small amount of Forest Service land permanently protected in Box-Death Hollow Wilderness Area, the rest of the Escalante is in the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument. Although this designation has stopped some adverse