drop north into Twentyfive Mile Wash. One of those canyons (shown to the north of elevation 4950AT) contains large potholes, though the canyon is difficult to get into (Class 4 + ). The closer you get to the escarpment leading to the Early Weed Bench trailhead, the more familiar things should look. Do not worry too much about hitting the trailhead right on, as this can be hard to do. (4.0-6.0 hours.)
Part 2: On down the river
(Egypt map.) Instead of exiting the river at the sand dune, continue downcanyon. The hiking varies between stretches of wading and making your way across benches behind thick stands of willow and tamarisk. A cave high on a wall to the left (N) just past the first corner (at the edge of the map) contains an inscription by Harry Aleson and the date May 27, 1949, which was during his second raft trip down the Escalante River. See the ''Harry Aleson and Georgie WhiteThe First to Run the Escalante" chapter for details.
Rock climber's note: A steep row of Moqui steps a short distance upcanyon from the cave leads to East Baker Bench (Class 5.4, 50').
(Scorpion Gulch map.) As you head downcanyon toward Moody Creek you can look for three Moqui-step exits out of the canyon. Two go south up to Scorpion; the other goes north up to East Baker Bench.
Rock climber's note: Although the Moqui-step exits are for rock climbers only, they are exciting to find, and their locations high on the walls of the river provide excellent vantage points. Both of the routes that exit to the south start with a moderate climb through an initial cliff band, then a traverse upcanyon to the highest cliff. Moqui steps will appear.
The first set of Moqui steps is located at the tip of a long peninsula shown to the north of elevation 5304T (Class 5.4, 20'). This exit is used on the Overland Route to escape Escalante Canyon on the way to Scorpion Gulch.
The second set of Moqui steps is located on a prow shown to the northeast of the same elevation and is visible from the river. This row of steps is exposed and intimidating (Class 5.3, 60').
The Moqui steps that exit Escalante Canyon to the north go up a prow to the west of a drainage shown to the west of elevation 5081T. This exit is used as an entrance to Escalante Canyon on the Overland Route.
To the Moody canyons
Moody Creek comes in on the left (N). The Chinle Formation forms the floor of the canyon and Wingate walls tower high above.