"batman" up it. Brown or black sling is less visually intrusive than brightly colored sling.
Canyoneers with a death wish use old sling found at anchors. One canyoneering "expert" suggested that it is okay to use old sling and claimed that one way to check it is to see if there are burn marks on the sling from previous parties pulling their ropes. This is dangerous nonsense. Always use new sling and carry a lot more than you think you will need.
Wet canyons can be a trial. In some, wet suits may be necessary. Dry suits are not appropriate in canyoneering. If they rip, they can fill with water and will no longer provide protection from the cold. Polypropylene or comparable clothing is the only choice in slot canyons. It insulates when wet, which cotton does not.
When carrying gear through a wet slot, it is best to pack equipment in river-type dry bags and put them inside your pack. This will keep the dry bag from abrading and will keep everything dry.
Sit harnesses sold for rock climbing work fine in slots, though they do wear out quickly. In narrow slots where there are long stretches of chimneying, it is often difficult to carry a daypack on your back. Suspending it from your sit harness with a short length of webbing eases the problem.
The impact of canyoneers in slot canyons is at present minor. However, with the growing number of participants, an environmental ethic is needed. Perhaps of biggest concern is the overuse of bolts for rappel anchors in slot canyons. Many have criticized my anti-bolt stand, saying that bolts are an essential tool and that slots cannot be safely descended without them. The first technical slot I did was in 1968. Over the last twenty-eight years I have had the privilege of going through hundreds of technical slots in Utah, Arizona, California, Nevada, and Baja California. I have never used bolts.
I have seen bolts installed next to huge chockstones, trees, or other adequate natural features, places where bolts certainly were not essential. In many instances rappel bollards can be constructed out of smaller boulders piled high to fashion an acceptable anchor or rocks can be piled on top of a marginal boulder to reinforce it. Sometimes placing boulders in a chockstone position in a slot will do the trick. In other instances one may have to look far upcanyon to find a suitable anchor.
One correspondent told me that bolts were cleaner than leaving long pieces of sling in a canyon. Sling, though, can be removed by the next party; the bolts will leave a permanent scar. Of more importance, bolts do not last long when placed in soft sandstone, and they often fail in a wet environment. In Kolob Creek Canyon in Zion National Park unneeded bolts were installed below the high-water