17.8
Signed Box-Death Hollow WildernessUpper Box Access on the right (E). Limited parking. The map shows a labeled Pack Trail. You are in Navajo Sandstone.
Digression: A superb dayhike going down The Box of Pine Creek starts here. You will need to do a car shuttle. Leave a car at the Lower Box Access (mile 7.3 on the Hells Backbone road). Hike southeast down the hill to Pine Creek. Follow a good path along the creek, crossing it many times. Plan on one long day or two short days (7.5 to 12.5 hours). There is excellent camping and the stream has a perennial flow of water. Avoid this canyon during periods of high water or during spring runoff. Good rock jumpers may be able to get down the creek dry footed. Most will want to wear wading boots. This hike is in Box-Death Hollow Wilderness Area.
18.1
"Y." Pine Creek sign. Follow the Hells Backbone road to the right (S).
21.3
(Roger Peak map.) "Tee." Stay on the main road to the right (NE).
22.5
Start of Death Hollow Hike #1. Signed Box-Death Hollow WildernessDeath Hollow Access. Parking on the left. You are one half mile south-southeast of Roger Peak (elevation 10,115 feet) and are in Navajo Sandstone.
23.4
"Tee." Signed Sand Creek and Great Western Trail trailhead on left (NE). Stay on the Hells Backbone road to the right (SE).
23.6
Cattle guard.
24.4
Hells Backbone bridge. This is the second bridge built across the gap. The first, erected during initial construction in 1933, was replaced in 1960.
25.5
This is approximately where you come out on Hikes #1 and 2 if you do complete loops.
27.1
Start of Sand Creek Hike #2. Sand Creek sign. You are at a jeep road shown on the map that goes north, parallel to Sand Creek. You are in Navajo Sandstone.
29.4
"Tee." Signed Bear Creek road. Cross signed Lake Creek. Stay on the Hells Backbone road.
38.3
(Boulder Town map.) "Leaving Dixie National Forest" sign.
38.5
"Tee." Track on the right (SW) leads to the Boulder Mail Trail trailhead and to the start of Hike #3. (This trailhead is more easily reached by way of Highway 12. See the Highway 12 Road Section for details.)