Historical note: The arch is named Downcanyon from Charlie Arch (AN). Charlie Olojas was an inveterate canyon explorer who was one of the first to come to Escalante country with the express goal of backpacking. Charlie died in 1995 at the age of eighty-five.
To Twentyfive Mile Wash
Again, head south along the rim. After a couple of hundred yards, locate a fifteen-foot Kayenta pinnacle/archlet. The main drainage to the southwhich is in a maze of small drainagescontains a large pothole. There is great camping in the area. (3.0-4.5 hours.)
Twentyfive Mile Wash soon becomes visible across the canyon to the west.
Rock climber's note: There are two routes to the river in this vicinity. Both contain Moqui steps and will take some exploring to find. One is located directly across from the mouth of Twentyfive Mile Wash and starts on a steep ramp that goes down an initial cliff band to a broad terrace (Class 4+ ). Hike southwest until you are near the south end of the terrace to the edge of the final cliff. A steep slab lined with Moqui steps (Class 5.2, 60', lots of exposure), a near-vertical gully, and a final drop down a short vertical wall (Class 5.5, 10') take you to the river. A cottonwood tree can help for the last ten feet.
The second route descends a long row of worn Moqui steps on a steep cliff that is a couple of hundred yards northeast of elevation 4538T (Class 5.1, 50').
The Overland RouteTwentyfive Mile Wash to Scorpion Gulch
To the Escalante River
(Egypt map.) From the rim of the Escalante escarpment opposite the mouth of Twentyfive Mile Wash go downcanyon along the rim. Head two short side canyons (shown to the east and west of elevation 5206T on the Scorpion Gulch map) . Both canyons contain medium potholes. Cross the neck of a long south-running peninsula (elevation 4801T), head a short Wingate side canyon, and walk to the rim of a larger side canyon (shown to the west of elevation 5081T).
You need to locate a route to the Escalante River. Follow the west rim of the larger side canyon south until you are above the river. A cliff band above a black cryptobiotic-soil-covered plain is descended via a short, steep gully. A couple of Moqui steps help ease the difficulty (Class 5.0, 50'). Hike downcanyon to a break in the final cliff and descend to the river. (3.0-5.0 hours.)