Down the Escalante River to Choprock Canyon
Hike and wade down the Escalante River. Harris Wash comes in on the right (LDC)(W) in fifteen minutes. The first canyon on the left (NE) is a true box with no escape routes out its top. The second and third canyons on the left (shown to the east and west of elevation 5252T) are a joy to explore if you are a rock climber.
The fourth side canyon that comes in on the left (NE) (shown to the west of elevation 5293T) has a constructed cattle trail that starts near its mouth on its downcanyon side. This trail provides easy access to Silver Falls Bench. Choprock Canyon comes in on the left (ENE) in another half hour. (Choprock Canyon is not named on the map. It is the long drainage to the west of elevation 5103T.) There is good camping and a string of large springs a short stroll upcanyon. (3.5-5.0 hours.)
Up Choprock Canyon
A couple of minutes upcanyon a cattle trail on the right (LUC)(E) goes up a Wingate wall.
To the Overland Route: You can intersect the section of the Overland Route that runs between Choprock Canyon and Twentyfive Mile Wash here. See the Overland Route description for details.
The East Fork of Choprock Canyon enters on the right (NE) in twenty minutes (shown to the east of elevation 5264T). This may be the last reliable water along the route during the dry season.
Digression: The East Fork is lush, narrow, and ends at a large pool below an impressive pour-off. (1.0 hour round-trip.)
The canyon quickly narrows and the Wingate walls rise. There may be some shallow wading or moderate stemming across potholes. Medium seeps in the canyon floor appear from time to time. There are plenty of good campsites. The West Fork of Choprock Canyon comes in on the left (N) (shown to the east of elevation 5290AT) and marks the end of the narrows. There are medium seeps in the vicinity. (2.0-3.0 hours.)
Rock climber's note: An absolutely fabulous but very long, difficult, and technical dayhike goes up the West Fork of Choprock Canyon, through two natural bridges, and returns along its rim. This route is only for very experienced canyoneers who are rock climbers. My friends and I call the West Fork the Poison Ivy Fork because it is filled with the plants.
Before starting this loop, you must first locate the descent route you will use to get back into Choprock Canyon at the end of the day. This downclimb is nearly impossible to find from above.