look east. Below you is the gorge of Brimstone Gulch. Farther to the east is a long, low ridge (elevations 5492T and 5387T). In the background, with only its upper half visible, is Scorpion Point, a flat-topped slickrock mesa (elevation 5460 on the Scorpion Gulch map). On its right side is a small pointed dome; to its right is a small dark pinnacle (the tail of the scorpion).
From the parking area at the end of the road locate a Wilderness Study Area sign on a flexible post at the start of a no longer used track that goes downhill to the southeast. Follow the track as it turns northeast and goes over the head of Brimstone Gulch and past elevation 5378T before turning south for a short distance. When the track turns northeast again, watch for a small arch in the middle of the long, low ridge to the right (E). (The arch is one-quarter mile east of elevation 5283T.) Leave the track and hike to the arch. It is formed from a thin layer of limestone that composes the lowest member of the Carmel Formation.
Hike east to the top of the ridge. Scorpion Point will be visible to the east. (Scorpion Gulch map.) Note that a descending ridge (containing elevation 5253T) drops northeast from the highest point. Scorpion Gulch starts at the end of this ridge, which should be used as a landmark. A sand dune on the west side of Scorpion Gulch near its head leads into the canyon. (3.5-4.5 hours.)
Down Scorpion Gulch
An established trail leads down Scorpion Gulch. Water starts flowing just past a large sand dune, though it disappears underground from time to time. An area of large spring-fed pools at a sharp left bend in the canyon is a delight. These springs are dry in the summer. (Map Twenty-two.) If you camp in the area, please stay in the sandy wash below the pools. Do not camp next to the pools.
The canyon enters the Wingate and becomes more narrow. A large chockstone is passed on the right (Class 4-). Below the chockstone a riparian habitat develops and large springs are found. Poison ivy becomes a problem. There are a few small campsites near the Escalante River. (2.5-3.5 hours.)
Rock climber's note: There are two difficult routes to the top of the Escalante escarpment on the opposite side of the river to the north. One consists of climbing a steep wall (Class 5.4, 25'); the other ascends a narrow rib dotted with Moqui steps that is a couple of hundred yards downcanyon from the mouth of Scorpion Gulch (Class 5.0, 60'). The route through the initial cliff band for both climbs starts 100 yards up the river.