Special equipment:
Part 1An eighty-foot climbing rope is essential.

Part 2Wading shoes or boots. No rope is needed.
Land status:
These hikes are in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
When we speak of "running the gamut" in canyoneering, we mean a route that has a lot of varietybenchlands, towers, arches, bridges, water, forests, tapestry walls, and more. The word gamut, though, started in the eleventh century as a musical term that defined a specific scale: ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la. The Phipps Wash hike cheerfully encompasses both definitionsit is long on variety and there is a melodic quality throughout. Enjoy.
The hike comes in two parts. Part 1 starts on the Old Sheffield road and goes down Phipps Wash, through Phipps Arch, and returns to the trailhead via a cross-country route.
Part 2 continues down Phipps Wash, detours by Maverick Natural Bridge, and goes to the Escalante River. After following the river downcanyon for a short distance, the route detours to Bowington Arch in Deer Canyon. It returns to the trailhead by way of a cross-country route.
Part 1: Down Phipps Wash
(Tenmile Flat map and Map Ten.) From the parking area hike northeast for 100 yards to the end of a wide point. Make your way down the right side of the point, cross a fence that is on the left, and go north into the shallow head of Phipps Wash. Follow one of several small washes downcanyon. They slowly converge and the wash deepens. Pass the first fall on the left (LDC)(N). The second drop comes up abruptly and consists of a large red-and-white-banded Navajo slickrock slab that you walk down. Remember this slab. It will be an important landmark on the return trip. In the distance, Phipps Arch is visible in an area of dark red domes to the north northeast. Unless the light is right, the arch appears to be a large cave.
Follow the drainage down the slab. Near its base look over your left shoulder (WNW). Note a white Navajo tower and a pinnacle to its right on the skyline. These features will be helpful on the return trip.
The third drop is into the main part of Phipps Wash. Pass the fall on the left (N) by scrambling down ledges. You may intersect an old constructed cattle trail near the floor of the canyon. A minute or so downcanyon note a large cowboy glyph on a varnished wall to the right (LDC)(S).
Historical note: Three men etched their names on the wall in 1899. William Alvey, John Justet, and William Osborn were all early inhabitants of Escalante.