Brigham Young envisioned a colony in the San Juan River drainage. Scouting reports from the area were promising and Young needed a solid settlement to provide a toehold in the new country. Before Young was able to act on his dream, however, he died. Leadership of the Mormon Church was passed to Apostle Erastus Snow, and in 1877 he ordered a mission to explore the country.
The initial San Juan Mission could be considered a reconnaissance party. It consisted of twenty-six men, two women, eight children, and a small herd of cattle. The explorers, led by Silas S. Smith, left Paragonah in April 1879. Going south, they passed through present-day landmarks of the Sevier River Valley including the towns of Hillsdale and Alton, Horse Rock Spring, and Jacobs Pool before crossing the Colorado River at Lee's Ferry.
They continued south to Moenkopi, then turned north and east through Navajo Indian country, passing Red Lake, Cow Spring, Cave Spring, Kayenta, and Montezuma. The settlers finally arrived in Bluff, their final destination, about the first of June, having covered 500 miles. Several months were spent exploring the surrounding country, laying out a townsite, clearing farmland, and building houses. Some of the expedition members returned to Paragonah, following the northern route of the Old Spanish Trail.
After the explorations by the San Juan Mission members, it was decided that a new route was neededthe original route was too long, did not have reliable water, and was threatened by hostile Indians. The northern route of the Old Spanish Trail via Salina Canyon, Green River, and Moab was well traveled, but it was 450 miles long. By comparison, a direct line between Cedar City and Bluff was only 205 miles.
Andrew P. Schow, Reuben Collett, and Charles Hall, all residents of the new town of Escalante, were given the task of finding a route across the Escalante Desert and the Colorado River. Hall traveled to the rim of Glen Canyon by himself and is credited with the actual discovery of the Hole-in-the-Rock. He was able to look up Cottonwood Wash on the east side of the river and, seeing no problems, stated in his report to church leaders that, "It would be something of a problem to get wagons down to the river, but once down and across, it would be a simple matter to move on to the San Juan, about sixty miles away."
Schow and Collett conducted their own survey of the country. They hauled a small boat on a two-wheeled cart to the escarpment overlooking Glen Canyon at Hole-in-the-Rock. Following the rim north for a couple of miles, they discovered a route to the Colorado River near what is now called the Jackass Bench Trail. After ferrying across the river, they hiked several miles up Cottonwood Wash. Finding no major impediments, Schow and Collett returned to Escalante and reported favorably on the route.