vation 6232). Hike to the south shoulder of the dome. Look south-southeast and locate a sandy high point on a ridge. Make your way to it. From its crest look east. You will see a long flat-topped dome (elevation 6294). To its right (S) are two small rounded domes. (King Bench map.) The trailhead is to the right of the right-hand dome. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
The Gulch and Horse CanyonHike #32
Season:
Spring or fall.
Time:
19.0 to 25.5 hours. Three to four days.
Water:
Water availability is a moderate problem on this route. The Gulch, the Escalante River, and lower Horse Canyon have perennial flows of water. The cross-country route back to the trailhead is dry.
Elevation range:
4840' to 5640'.
Maps:
King Bench and Red Breaks.
Skill level:
Moderately difficult route finding. There is one long cross-country stretch. Class 5.0 climbing. The leader must be experienced with be lay techniques and be capable of leading the climbing section without protection. Lots of wading. This is a moderate hike. Familiarity with low-impact camping skills is essential.
Special equipment:
Wading boots. A fifty-foot rope is essential.
Land status:
This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
The word "canyon" is derived from the Greek kanna and the Latin canon. Both refer to hollow reeds. The Spanish borrowed from the Latin and Greek to form the word caña, or "tube." Caña then became the root of the Spanish word cañon, which means a narrow chasm.
The word cañon made its way first to central Mexico with the conquistadors, then north into what is now the western United States. There it became Anglicized, with spelling variations that included cannion, cannon, cannyon, kanyun, and kenyon. It was not until Zebulon Montgomery Pike, the famous explorer of the West, wrote about his adventures in the early 1800s that the modern American spelling of "canyon" was introduced. The modern spelling was not used universally until the 1900s. Diarists on the Powell expeditions in the 1870s generally used cañon, and it is spelled that way in an 1879 edition of McGuffey's Eclectic Spelling-Book.