To Georges Camp Canyon
Walk and wade down the Escalante River. Georges Camp Canyon is the first canyon on the left (N). Its mouth is marked by a large abandoned meander (elevation 4677T). The canyon to the left (W) of the abandoned meander contains a large freshwater spring and good campsites are nearby. (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Rock climber's note: A fine route suitable for rock climbers starts here. The hike takes 9.0-12.0 hours, requires several short climbing pitches, some wading, and perhaps a short swim or two.
Follow a rarely used horse trail up a steep hill to the right (E) side of the abandoned meander. The Wingate wall to the right (E), though it looks sheer from the ground, is broken in one place. (Map Twenty-two.) Find a route through a hole and up a chimney (Class 5.4, 60') to the top of the wall. You may see a worn row of Moqui steps on your way up. This route may take some scouting to find.
Follow the right (E) rim of the east fork of Georges Camp Canyon, staying on top of the Wingate or running along Kayenta benches for about three hours until it is possible to drop into the canyon. (There are many entrances once you are even with elevation 6318T on the Stevens Canyon North map).
Proceed downcanyon. The canyon narrows and short pouroffs into pools prove challenging (Class 5.5, 20'). You must deal with some directly; others you can find routes around. A wall on the left (LDC) in the middle of the narrows contains an amazing row of Moqui steps that go up an overhang. Pass a large fall on a thin ledge to the right (LDC); then climb down a short crack. The climbing difficulties are over, but there are still a couple of hours of boulder hopping and rough going ahead before you reach the Escalante River.
To the Scorpion Horse Trail
From Georges Camp Canyon continue down the Escalante River for twenty minutes to a large cliff dune on the right (W) (located at 2-255, an abandoned meander shown on the map). Before you leave the river, calculate your water needs. You will not find water along the route until back at the trailhead, 8.0 to 10.5 hours away. Ajump start is advised. Hike up the dune. The Scorpion Horse Trail becomes apparent as you enter the Kayenta. A wide terrace on top of the Kayenta provides an excellent place to camp for the night. (1.0 hour.)
From the top of the Kayenta follow the horse trail upcanyon (NW) below towering Navajo walls. The trail heads several short canyons and in an hour it turns abruptly left (S) (one-quarter mile east of elevation 5058T), goes up a steep broken hill, through a brush fence, and disappears in the sand at the top of the escarpment. (1.5-2.5 hours.)