However spelled, the two canyons covered on this route are classics. The Gulch is similar in ambience to Harris Wash: a small stream wends its way through park-like glens shaded by huge cottonwoods, evidence of Fremont and Anasazi occupation abounds, and opportunities for side exploration seem endless.
The downside to hiking in The Gulch is that its upper reaches have been trashed by cattle. Horse Canyon, wide and highwalled throughout, is akin to a major highway interchangeconstructed cattle trails and canyons branch off every which way.
The hike starts on the Burr Trail and goes down The Gulch to the Escalante River. After following the river for a short distance, the route turns into Horse Canyon and goes partway up it. A cross-country stretch across King Bench leads back into The Gulch, which is followed to the trailhead.
Down The Gulch
(King Bench map and Map Forty-three.) Ramble down the wide, flat-floored bottom of The Gulch. A cattle trail following the general course of an old road that used to go down the canyon makes for easy hiking. During periods of high water there may be some shallow wading as the trail crisscrosses the stream.
Digression: Note a constructed cattle trail going up the cliff wall on the left (E) just a few minutes downcanyon from the trailhead. Some may want to use this trail on the return hike. The first landmark is a line shack on the right (shown on the map). (1.5-2.0 hours.)
The next landmark is another line shack, this one on the left (located one-quarter mile south-southeast of the "e" in The.) (2.0-2.5 hours.)
Below the second line shack the canyon narrows. During periods of high water there may be some deep wading. At an abrupt left turn, the stream drops over a short fall into a narrow gorge (south-southeast of elevation 5412). It is wisest to explore these narrows from the bottom. To get around the narrows, first look downcanyon (E). Note a beautiful wall streaked with black-and-brown desert varnish framed by the narrows. Remember this wall.
Backtrack upcanyon for about four minutes to an indent in the wall to the left (LUC)(W). There is a log against the cliff. Ascend a slab on downsloping holds to the right of the log (Class 5.0, 20', belay). This is the first possible exit out of the canyon. Continue up steep slabs to the top. Follow the rim downcanyon until you are even with the black-and-brown-varnish-streaked wall. Look southeast. Below you is a vegetation-covered bench. A hiker-developed