Ten minutes above the mouth of Little Death Hollow is a line shack on the left. The springs that feed Horse Canyon start here. (The line shack and the spring are shown on the map.) This is the last reliable water until you reach The Gulch, 3.5-5.0 hours away. Load up here.
Exit Horse Canyon
Ten minutes upcanyon from the spring, a constructed cattle trail exits the canyon to the left (NW). (The first part of the trail is shown to the north, east, and southeast of elevation 5678 on the King Bench map.) The trail is tricky to find. It goes up the first low spot in the Kayenta, and you pass it while cutting corners on a track. Look for a large cairn ten feet above the canyon floor. The trail is easy to follow as it winds its way around domes and up cliffs. It fades in an area of drift sand near the top of the hill. (1.5-2.0 hours.)
To The Gulch
You now have a choice. If water is a concern, follow the standard route into The Gulch. If speed is your goal, see the alternate route below.
Continue following the cattle trail as it leads initially northwest across King Bench. In places it is six feet or more wide, revealing that it is still used.
Historical note: King Bench was named for John King, a rancher who moved to the Salt Gulch area near the town of Boulder in the early 1890s.
Before reaching Halfway Hollow the trail turns west, then drops into The Gulch (west of elevation 5322). (This is not the same cattle trail shown to the northwest of elevation 5685.) If you do lose the cattle trail, do not panic! Simply continue west across King Bench. Halfway Hollow is reasonable to cross at almost any point and it is not difficult to find a route through the low Navajo walls that line The Gulch. (3.5-5.0 hours.)
Alternate route: This route follows a direct line from Horse Canyon to the top of The Gulch near the Burr Trail. It avoids the long walk back up The Gulch. There is no water and it is easy to get confused as to exactly where you are on the top of King Bench. Only experienced canyoneers should attempt this route.
From the top of the cattle trail above Horse Canyon set a course northwest. Once past Halfway Hollow, go north-northwest. Your aim is to intersect The Gulch near the Burr Trail. You can use the constructed cattle trail mentioned at the start of the hike to en-