Although the main search ended, various individuals kept looking for Everett for many years. Tantalizing bits of evidence surfaced from time to time, but none of the evidence was trustworthy. A human femur bone was discovered near Twilight Canyon by a boating party led by river runner Norm Nevills. He speculated that Everett's body may have washed down from the Kaiparowits Plateau.
Famed river runner Harry Aleson kept in touch with Stella and Christopher Ruess, Everett's parents. In 1950, in a cave near the mouth of Clear Creek Canyon, Aleson found an old Mackinaw jacket with potsherds in the pockets that he believed could have been Everett's.
In 1957, archaeologists found camping equipment in Reflection Canyon, which is a couple of miles south of the Escalante River; but the gear could not be positively identified as Everett's.
Reports from people claiming to have seen Everett came from Moab and Mexico; but all sightings led nowhere. It is unlikely that the final disposition of Everett Ruess will ever be determined. Shortly before his disappearance, Everett wrote a friend that, "When I go I leave no trace." These words, written at an encampment near Navajo Mountain, a rounded summit within sight of the rim of Davis Gulch, proved prophetic and puzzling. Perhaps Everett would have enjoyed the mystery surrounding his death or disappearance. More than his writing or artwork, Everett's departure has ensured his status in history, legend, and myth.
Fiftymile CreekHike #25
Season:
Any.
Time:
5.5 to 7.5 hours.
Water:
Water availability is not a problem on this hike. Lower Fiftymile Creek has a perennial flow of water.
Elevation range:
3700' to 4230'.
Maps:
Sooner Bench and Davis Gulch.
Skill level:
Easy route finding. Most of this hike is Class 2 walking. There are a couple of short Class 4 obstacles that few will have problems with. This is a moderate hike.
Special equipment:
If you are doing the rock climber's route, a 100-foot rope is essential. Those planning to swim in Lake Powell should bring wading shoes. There is a stretch of wet narrows before you reach the lake.
Land status:
This hike is in Glen Canyon National Recreation Area.