Upper Brimstone GulchThe SlotHike #17 
Season:
Any. Recent rains will make this a tough hike.
Time:
5.0 to 7.0 hours.
Water:
There may be no water along this route. Bring your own drinking water.
Elevation range:
4800' to 5440'.
Maps:
Egypt and Big Hollow Wash.
Skill level:
Moderate route finding. Class 4 climbing. There may be some wading. This route is suitable for thin athletes only. The slot is so narrow that those of hefty build cannot make it through. This slot is not appropriate for claustrophobes, novice slot canyoneers, youngsters, or youth groups.
Special equipment:
Wading boots. Use the smallest daypack you can. A large pack will be difficult to maneuver through the narrowest sections. A forty-foot rope will prove useful.
Land status:
This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
Brimstone Gulch reminds me of one of my childhood heroes, David Innes, who, in Edgar Rice Burroughs's At the Earth's Core, made his way to Pellucidar, a land buried deep in the very bowels of the earth. Brimstone Gulch is often explored from its bottom end, but hikers there are stopped by its unrelenting narrows. Its upper section also contains long stretches of tight, sinuous narrows.
The route starts on top of Early Weed Bench and descends most of Brimstone Gulch. It returns to the trailhead along the rim of the canyon, providing an opportunity to view an exquisite and seldom seen arch.
Down Brimstone Gulch
(Egypt map, Map Twenty and Map Twenty-one.) From the parking area at the end of the road locate a Wilderness Study Area sign on a flexible post at the start of a no longer used track that goes downhill to the southeast. Follow the sandy track for five minutes until it crosses a short stretch of Navajo slickrock, dips into a shallow wash, then goes up a gentle risethe first uphill section of the track. Do not go up the hill. Leave the track and hike southeast down the wash.
Easily skirt two small drops. Pass the third dropa steep slot lined with large potholeson the left by descending a broken wall