tion of this area as a national monument will be the preservation for all time and under proper control of the many scenic wonders and areas of archaeological importance." The report went on to say: "It is reasonable to expect that the proceeds due directly or indirectly to tourist business will mean more to Southern Utah than those from any other use to which this barren and almost unproductive area may be put."
Pressure from extractive industries stopped the establishment of Escalante National Monument, however, and set the tone for future battles over the canyons: Was the drive for private profits more important than protecting the land for all Americans to enjoy?
Little happened on the conservation front until the passing of the Wilderness Act in 1964. That act defined wilderness as "an area where the earth and its community of life are untrammeled by man, where man himself is a visitor who does not remain." The Wilderness Act further stated that wilderness is an area where one can find solitude and where there is the opportunity for primitive and unconfined recreation.
Unfortunately, the Wilderness Act only applied to certain U.S. Forest Service, National Park Service, and Fish and Wildlife Service lands. These agencies were required to inventory their holdings and recommend areas that met the criteria for wilderness. This led to the establishment of the 26,000-acre Box-Death Hollow Wilderness Area in Dixie National Forest in the northwest part of the Escalante region in 1984. It protects just a tiny corner of the Aquarius Plateau: The Box of Pine Creek and small areas at the heads of Death Hollow and Sand Creek.
The Colorado River Storage Project Act of 1956 called for the construction of Glen Canyon Dam. Interim administration of the land around the soon-to-be-formed Lake Powell was given to the National Park Service in cooperation with the Bureau of Reclamation. Although the dam was finished and the lake started filling in 1963, a proposed Glen Canyon National Recreation Area (GCNRA) bill was not introduced in Congress until 1965. Battles between developers and environmentalists erupted over which land should be included in GCNRA.
In the Escalante, the initial bill would have protected the canyon only as far upriver as Twentyfive Mile Wash and Middle Moody Canyon. Conservationists countered with a proposal to extend GCNRA to Utah Highway 12 and to make all of the land in the Escalante a designated wilderness area. The GCNRA bill went through several revisions and was reintroduced in Congress in 1965, 1968, and 1970 before finally passing in 1971. A compromise was reached between the opposing groupsthe Escalante was divided a couple