be found in Harris Wash, at the confluence, and along the Escalante River. (1.5-2.5 hours.)
The exit route
Follow a troublesome path along the right side of the Escalante River (or wade) as you make your way downcanyon. In fifteen minutes a short drainage comes in on the right (SW). Past the drainage the thrashing ends and a good trail cuts across a wide bench. Within a couple of minutes of starting across the wide bench a sandy slope to the right (SW) marks the exit route out of the canyon. (The sandy slope is north of an abandoned meander shown as elevation 5056T.) Make your way up the slope toward the middle of the abandoned meander. Near its Navajo base intersect a constructed cattle trail and follow it to the north side of the abandoned meander. A sand dune to the southwest takes you out of the canyon.
To the trailhead
From the top of the dune go southwest for a couple of minutes until a dominant escarpment to the south-southwest becomes plainly visible. Though most of the walls of the escarpment are rounded, there is one large vertical wall (north-northwest of''Red" at elevation 5933). Make your way southwest across broken slickrock, sagebrush, and sand and ascend steep slickrock (Class 3-) just to the right (W) of the vertical wall. From a distance this prow looks intimidating, but once you are on it the angle of the rock is less than it first appeared.
From the top, a short stroll southeast takes you to Red Point, which has a bench mark on its summit. A southerly course takes you back to the stock pond. (Egypt map.) (2.5-3.5 hours.)
Part 2: To Fence Canyon
(Silver Falls Bench map.) From the base of the Part 1 exit route, continue hiking and wading down the Escalante River.
Digression: Hike #35 describes some of the side canyons that enter the Escalante on the left (LDC). Choprock Canyon is especially worth exploring.
You will leave the river at Fence Canyon, the first major side canyon on the right (W). (Egypt map.) (3.0-4.5 hours.)
To the trailhead
Water is not available after leaving the river. Load up here. Hike up Fence Canyon (W). It divides in a quarter mile. Follow a trail up the point that divides the two canyons. Look west-northwest at a slickrock escarpment that has a couple of wide ribs dropping from