Water:
There is no water along the route. Bring your own drinking water.
Map:
Deer Point.
Skill level:
Easy route finding. Class 3 + scrambling. There is a great deal of elevation gain, making this hike suitable only for the fit.
Special equipment:
None.
Land status:
This hike is in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument.
Sometimes lovers of the "inverted mountains" miss much by staying between canyon walls. It is difficult to assess an area's character by seeing only a small part of the whole. Deer Point, a small mesa that straddles the Waterpocket Fold between the Circle Cliffs and the Halls Creek section of Capitol Reef National Park, gives one the opportunity to see how many of the little pieces of the canyon puzzle fit together. The hike to the top of Deer Point does not form a loop, but it does offer an unsurpassed vantage point for viewing the surrounding country.
To Deer Point
(Deer Point map and Map Forty-six.) From the parking area one can clearly see the two arms of Deer Point to the north and northeast. A steep slope at the back of the "Vee" formed by the arms provides access to the top of Deer Point. Hike east for a few minutes over low Chinle hills to an old mining track. Follow it along the rim of Middle Moody Canyon until it crosses the valley that leads northnortheast up to the "Vee." Leave the track and scramble and boulder hop up the valley.
At the Wingate, the valley turns into a shallow canyon. Follow it to the top of the mesa. A bench mark from 1934 denotes Pockets, a dome to the left (W). The highest elevation on Deer Point is to the right (E) (elevation 7265T). From the high point the view of the surrounding desert is amazing:
East-northeast: The two summits of the Little Rockies. The peak to the left is Mt. Holmes (7,998'), the one to the right is Mt. Ellsworth (8,253').
Northeast: The LaSal Mountains are in the far distance.
North-northeast: The three summits of the Henry Mountains. From left to right the peaks are Mt. Ellen (11,506'), Mt. Pennell (11,132'), and Mt. Hillers (10,737'). Below you are the Navajo escarpment of the Waterpocket Fold and the Halls Creek gorge. Early explorers variously called Halls Creek Hoxie Creek, Grand Gulch, Waterpocket Canyon, or Canopy Canyon.
North-northwest: The white Navajo domes of Capitol Reef. The southern reef of the San Rafael Swell is barely visible in the far