Rock climber's note: Hike south up the "ladders" canyon until near its head. You will plainly see two aluminum ladders on a wall to the right. Climb the ladders (Class 5.0, 35'), then join the standard route.
Warning: The ladders were installed by a youth group several years ago. You must decide if they are safe or not. If you deem them unreliable, use the standard route. Belays must be used. It is possible that the ladders will be removed in the future.
To the trailhead
To the southwest is a long, low cliff band. Hike west across the plain parallel to the cliff until you intersect the Old Sheffield road, which at this point is a sandy track. You can now either follow the road or cut away from the track and head directly for the trailhead. Since the track is very sandy, it is not easy to walk it, although it is reassuring. (2.5-3.5 hours.)
Part 2: To Horse Canyon
(Red Breaks map.) From the mouth of the "ladders" canyon continue downriver. The next stretch has easy walking and is remarkable for its stunning tapestry walls. Horse Canyon, with its wide and plainly visible mouth, enters on the left (NE). This marks the start of the dark red, slope-and ledge-forming Kayenta Formation. There is good camping near the canyon's mouth, which usually has clear water. (2.0-2.5 hours.)
To the Upper Sand Slide exit route
One turn below Horse Canyon note an arch on the skyline to the left. After rounding a long peninsula (elevation 4840), look for the inscription "JA Burr 1891" on a wall to the west.
Historical note: The story of John Atlantic Burr is recounted under the historical note in the Burr Trail Road Section.
Several minutes past the Burr inscription note a sand dune and an abandoned meander to the right (located one-quarter mile west of elevation 5210). This dune is not significant, except that you do not want to confuse it with the next dune downcanyon, which is important.
Ten minutes below the first dune, keep a lookout for a second sand dune dropping from the right (SW). A tower divides the dune, and from the canyon floor you cannot see its top. (The dune is located one-half mile south of elevation 5210 at the second "r" in River.)