Hole-In-The-RockThe Story Continues
The story of the Hole-in-the-Rock does not stop with the initial expedition. Mormon pioneers continued to use the road for another year, until Charles Hall established the Harris Wash/Silver Falls Creek/Muley Twist Canyon route to the Colorado River. In 1881 William Hyde opened a trading post at the Hole-in-the-Rock that was frequented by Navajo and Piute Indians crossing the river from the east to the fertile grazing lands on the Escalante Desert and the Kaiparowits Plateau. It is not known how long Hyde stayed, perhaps just a year or two.
The next phase of use began with the discovery of gold in Glen Canyon. In October 1871 three men who were bringing supplies to the second Powell expedition found gold in Kane Creek and other Colorado River tributaries. John Wesley Powell, though, was not interested in gold and his men's finds went unnoticed.
It was not until Cass Hite, the founder of Dandy Crossing near what is now Hite Marina, discovered gold in northern Glen Canyon in the fall of 1883 that word got out. The gold rush that followed Hite's find was short and not very productive. While gold was plentiful, it was as fine as flour, making it exceptionally difficult to separate from the river sand.
J.R. Neilson arrived in Escalante in 1888. There he built a thirty-eight-foot double-decked boat that he hauled in pieces through the Hole-in-the-Rock to the Colorado River. After assembling it and loading it with mining equipment, he floated downcanyon, trying placer mining on benches above the river. The enterprise was not successful and the boat was abandoned near Lees Ferry.
Robert Brewster Stanton launched the most ambitious mining enterprise in Glen Canyon. Stanton had been through both Glen Canyon and the Grand Canyon in 1889 while scouting a potential railroad route along the river. The route was not feasible; but, after talking to Cass Hite, Stanton became excited about the gold mining possibilities.
In 1897 Stanton and a group of financiers formed the Hoskaninni Mining Company. They quickly staked 145 placer claims encompassing 19,000 acres along the length of Glen Canyon,