have mileposts along it, they are used in this road section. (Mileposts are not used in any of the other road sections in this guide.) The road is paved and is suitable for all vehicles. Side roads lead to camping near the highway. Mileage starts at Escalante Outfitters in the town of Escalante. (See Map Five.)
59.7
(Escalante map.) At Escalante Outfitters. Follow the highway east.
60.2
Signed Hells Backbone road to the left (N). This road provides access to Hikes #1 through 3. See the Hells Backbone Road Section for details.
61.0
Signed "Escalante Trailhead Jct" to the left (N). This road provides access to the upper Escalante Canyon trailhead.
Side road to the upper Escalante Canyon trailhead
0.0
At Highway 12. Go north.
0.1
Pass the cemetery on its right. Cattle guard. The road turns east.
0.3
"Tee." Go left (NW).
0.5
"Y" Go left (NW). The road ahead gets rougher. Light-duty vehicles may not be able to make it to the trailhead.
0.9
Large, steep parking circle at the trailhead. The head of Navajo-walled Escalante Canyon is plainly visible to the north-northeast.
Digression: A trail, starting at a hiker's maze, leads across private property (do not leave the trail) to the river. A trail register is located near the river. For those hiking down the river to the Highway 12 bridge, it will take 3.5 to 4.5 hours to reach the mouth of Death Hollow, 2.0 to 3.0 more hours to reach the mouth of Sand Creek, and another 1.0 hours to reach Highway 12.
End of side road
64.8
(Dave Canyon map.) Signed Hole-in-the-Rock road to the right (SE). This road provides access to Hikes #10 through 29. See the Hole-in-the-Rock Road Section for details.
68.0
(Tenmile Flat map.) Start of Big Flat Wash, the Escalante River, and the Bowington road Hike #4. Park off the road near the mile 68 signpost. You are at the red 20 in the upper left corner of the map and are in the Carmel Formation.
69.4
Top of a hill. A track to the left (E) marks the start of a section of the Old Boulder road, which diverges from Highway 12.
Digression: For those wishing to hike this section of the Old Boul-