Wind will render even the best stove useless. Sandstone slab windbreaks tend not to work very well. Instead, bring a thick foil windscreen like the ones from Mountain Safety Research. It will solve the problem.
Any gas, whether it is Coleman fuel or gasoline, has a short shelf life. That quart of fuel you've been storing in the garage for a couple of years will clog your stove. Use fresh fuel for every trip.
Footwear: Heavy all-leather mountaineering-type boots are preferable for long trips with heavy loads unless you will be doing a lot of wading. Long-distance travel in the water will stretch most leather boots into oblivion. Many prefer composite boots made from both leather and syntheticsusually nylon and Gore-Tex. They are lighter and less expensive than the all-leather boots and seem to breathe better. Boots with nylon midsoles keep their shape better when wet than those made with leather.
Composite boots do have one drawback in sandstone country. The external stitching wears out quickly. This problem can be alleviated by coating all of the seams with Barge Cement, which will act as a sacrificial layer. It can be reapplied from time to time.
Camp shoes are essential. Tennis shoes are recommended. Often people bring sandals instead of tennis shoes for wading and camp wear. Sandals do not protect you as well as tennis shoes from cactus spines and jagged rocks. If your boots or feet fall apart, you cannot hike out in sandals. Tennis shoes give you an option. The smooth soles of tennis shoes also prove less damaging to the environment than lug-soled boots around camp, which lessens the impact.
Since it is a cardinal sin to wade barefoot, your tennis shoes can be used when you only have to cross a river a time or two; if you will be spending a lot of time wading, wear your boots. Changing from hot, heavy, or perhaps wet boots into tennis shoes at the end of the day gives your feet a chance to breathe and will keep you from getting prune foot.
The use of ankle gaiters will keep your socks clean by keeping the dirt and sand out. They work especially well when wading in rivers.
Raingear: Rain suits are preferable in the backcountry. Ponchos flap around your legs and make it difficult and unsafe to negotiate steep rock faces or walk along narrow ledges.
Water containers: On most hikes you should have the capacity to carry at least six quarts of water. The smoke-colored Nalgene water bottles do not pick up and hold the taste of drink mixes or iodine like standard plastic bottles.