Young friends I hike with often baffle me with the descriptive words they use. I grew up with "cool," "boss" ''radical" and "gnarly." They use "cashmere" for top quality; "dope" instead of cool or good; "chossy" for crumbly or lousy rock; and my favorite, "Baldwin," a term that derives from the handsome brothers of movie fame, which apparently means "the best." We used to "climb" a route; they'll say they "sent" it. I'd say Fiftymile Creek is an outstanding canyon; they'd say its "Shwang Betty" or a "Bo Derek" (a perfect 10). Whatever terms you do use to describe Fiftymile Creek, whether they are common and understandable or obtuse and idiomatic, you will find this route rewarding.
This partial loop starts at the Hole-in-the-Rock road and goes down an unnamed gorge to Fiftymile Creek. It is followed to Lake Powell. Another unnamed canyon and a cross-country jaunt lead back to the trailhead.
Down Fiftymile Creek
(Sooner Bench map and Map Thirty-three.) Look southwest toward the Straight Cliffs. The jut of land that projects east toward you is Cave Point. It will be an important landmark on the return trip.
Hike into a wash that goes east for 100 yards and then turns abruptly to the right (S). The wash quickly enters the Navajo and, after a short distance, drops into an inner gorge at a thirty-foot fall. Pass the fall on the left and enter the gorge.
In forty-five minutes a shallow canyon comes in on the right (S). (Davis Gulch map.) Continue down the main canyon. Note a cave on the left. Below it on a smooth wall is a row of Moqui steps to nowhere. At one time this may have led to a granary. A large canyon enters on the right (S). This is Fiftymile Creek. This spot will be called Fiftymile Junction in the text below. It will be the exit canyon at the end of the day. (The junction is one-quarter mile southeast of elevation 4207T.) (1.0-1.5 hours.)
Historical note: Fiftymile Creek was called Soda Gulch by early ranchers, and it appears that way on old maps. Members of a National Geographic expedition into Escalante country in 1949 accomplished the first known descent of Soda Gulch. They found the upper part of the canyon wide and easy, but the lower partnow under Lake Powellwas a four-foot-wide constriction. Trip members described it as a "nightmare"; quicksand forced them to abandon their horses and they had to swim or chimney across long stretches of cold water.
Ten minutes downcanyon you reach the first cottonwood tree and the start of a riparian area. A minute below this first tree, on the