done in one push, though that would be an incredible accomplishment. It is meant for those looking for remote and seldom-explored country and to provide options for those doing other hikes in the guide.
Most sections of the Overland Route are appropriate only for hardcore canyoneers who are also experienced rock climbers. Difficult climbing on steep walls, demanding route-finding problems, long distances between known water sources, and other assorted perils await the bold explorer.
Often the route descriptions are brief. You must be well versed in map reading and not be intimidated by long stretches of complex and convoluted terrain. You will not find the Overland Route marked on the maps in the guide. The dedicated and adventurous will be forced to assemble the puzzle on their own.
Warning: Do not take any of the Overland Route lightly. It is intricate, at times trying, and, without a doubt, dangerous.
The Overland RouteHighway 12 to Silver Falls Creek
Highway 12 to Boulder Creek
(Calf Creek map.) The route starts on the Haymaker Bench portion of Highway 12. You are in Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument. Use the route description detailed in Hike #5 to get into Boulder Creek and to its confluence with Deer Creek. Use the route description in Hike #30 to go down Boulder Creek to the narrows an hour below the confluence of Boulder and Deer creeks. (King Bench map.) Exit the canyon by way of the "crease" to the rim of the canyon. You are now at the mouth of the "Tanks" drainage just above Boulder Creek.
To The Gulch
From the mouth of the "Tanks" drainage, look southeast. On the right is a large brown-gray dome; to the left is a red-and-white Navajo-walled escarpment. Hike through the gap between the dome and the escarpment and follow a canyon (shown a quarter mile west of elevation 5886) south until you are on a short cliff above Boulder Creek. Go down the creek for 150 yards and exit the canyon via a steep slot to the left (ENE). The slot (Class 4) becomes narrower and the rock looser near the top. Exit the top of the slot and work southeast, then south, to a handsome old line shack on a flat plain.
Note: The location of the line shack is shown as a small black square and is correctly placed on the USGS map. A trail from the