13.9
Large stock pond on the right (shown at elevation 5349T).
Digression: There is direct access to the head of Choprock Canyon from the stock pond. Hike up a draw to the west-northwest and over a rise to the head of Choprock Canyon
14.1
A U-shaped gap in the Wingate and Chinle cliff to the right (SSW) (between elevations 6281T and 6114T) provides difficult access to one of the southern forks of Choprock Canyon. On the far side of the gap is the finest Chinle tower "garden" in the area. These gardens form when a hard caprock protects the underlying rock from weathering, leaving behind stands of thin pinnacles. In 1875 explorer Grove Karl Gilbert noticed towers like these during his geologic and geographic explorations of the Escalante area. He called them "witch pinnacles."
16.7
Enter Moody Creek and Glen Canyon National Recreation Area. The road gets rougher.
18.8
Start of a spring area. Tamarisks line the wash and the canyon narrows. After recent rains this area may not be passable. There is a corral on the right.
19.0
The track leaves the wash to the left. This is a trailhead for those wanting to hike down the main fork of Moody Creek to the Escalante River.
Digression: A break in the Wingate wall to the northwest (onequarter mile south-southeast of elevation 5881T) provides Class 3 access to Baker Bench. The route is tucked into a corner and cannot be seen fully from here.
19.1
Large parking and camping area on the right, halfway up a hill.
22.3
"Y." Follow the road to the right (ESE). (This road is not shown on the map.) The track to the left (NE) provides access to Hike #36.
Side track to Deer PointAn Ascent Hike #36
0.0
Follow the track to the left (NE). This track is for high-clearance vehicles only.
1.4
"Tee." Stay on the main track to the left (E).
3.1
Start of Deer PointAn Ascent Hike #36. You are on a level plain below colorful Chinle hills. This is one of the best and most isolated car-camping spots in the Escalante area. You are at the end of a 4WD track shown one mile northwest of elevation 601 OAT on the Deer Point map.
End of side track