Ginger Harmon on the Jackass Bench Trail.
from a couple of miles above Hite to Lees Ferry Their plan was to build a special dredge that could isolate the flour gold. A dam built near the mouth of the Dirty Devil River was to provide water and electricity to power the dredge. Once the infrastructure was in place, the dredge would slowly make its way downcanyon. To that end, a dredge was carted to the river in pieces and assembled at Camp Stone, which was a couple of miles upcanyon from Bullfrog Basin.
While the dredge was being assembled, Stanton sent Nathaniel Galloway and twenty-six laborers to the Hole-in-the-Rock to improve the ramp at the top and The Hole-in-the-Rock expedition used Tenmile Springwhich is ten miles from Escalantefor their first campsite. Expedition member George Decker wrote in his diary: "Moved to 10 Miles Gulch, feed scarce, water up." A wagon road developed by ranchers ended at Tenmile Spring. A single-track trail continued on. The going started to get rough. to reconstruct the lower section. This was to be a major resupply route for the dredging operation. Galloway and his crew are responsible for the long series of platform steps along the first quarter mile of the ramp.
Simultaneously, Galloway and his crew improved the Jackass Bench Trail, an old livestock path that starts a mile north of the Hole-in-the-Rock and descends steep slickrock onto the now inundated Jackass Bench. This steep, dangerous trail was first used by scouts on the Hole-in-the-Rock expedition. Galloway abandoned the trail after losing nine pack animals in falls.
Meanwhile, Stanton had started his dredging operation, which was a failure. The gold was too fine to separate from the sand. After gleaning a couple of hundred dollars worth of gold from the river, the Hoskaninni Mining Company went bankrupt. The dredge sat along the river for many years, its beams and metal parts slowly stripped by other miners. It is now under Lake Powell.
In 1900 Henry N. Cowles and Joseph T. Hall (no relation to