examples. It is harder, after all, to get excited about such colorless-sounding places as Cottonwood Wash, Cow Canyon, or Sheep Gulch.
The two elegant slots presented in this hikePeek-a-boo and Spooky gulchesare of such high quality that they do live up to their enigmatic appellations. There has been some speculation about where their names came from. Shortly before his death in 1993, Escalante historian and schoolteacher Edson Alvey told me that they were suggested while he was exploring the two slot canyons with a group of schoolchildren on Halloween day in 1935.
The route starts on top of Early Weed Bench and descends the whole length of Spooky Gulch; it returns via most of Peek-a-boo Gulch.
Down Spooky Gulch
(Egypt map, Map Twenty, and Map Twenty-one.) Hike south into Spooky Gulch. (Spooky Gulch is not labeled on the map. It starts one-eighth mile east of elevation 5453T.) The canyon drops quickly and enters a long, tight slot. The crux of the route comes at a twenty-foot drop. Skirt along the right edge of the canyon for twenty-five yards to a point where the slot narrows considerably. Chimney down into the slot (Class 5.0, 12' belay as necessary). There may be some wading ahead. The canyon alternates between short slots and sandy stretches until it ends at Dry Fork Coyote. (Big Hollow Wash map.) (3.0-3.5 hours.)
Up Peek-a-boo Gulch
Hike up Dry Fork Coyote for fifteen minutes to the mouth of Peek-a-boo Gulch. (Peek-a-boo Gulch is not labeled on the map. It is located one-quarter mile east of elevation 4988.) A chiseled row of steps leads up a short wall into the canyon. The Peek-a-boo slot ends in a sandy wash. Follow the wash north until a canyon starts to develop, then divides (one-quarter mile east-southeast of elevation 5203T on the Egypt map). The main canyon goes left (NW). Hike into the canyon on the right (NE).
Digression: Follow the main fork to the left. Though the canyon ends at a fall in a half mile, it is delightfully narrow. (1.0 hour round-trip.)
The canyon quickly ends. Scramble out of it and follow a ridge line north between Peek-a-boo Gulch on the left and Spooky Gulch on the right. A variety of multicolored domes, knobs, and heavily cross-bedded sandstone provides a fitting finish to a fine day. Hike the road back to the trailhead. (2.5-3.5 hours.)