Land status:
These hikes are in Glen Canyon National Recreation Area.
Fantasia, a word most commonly used to describe a musical creation, has two meanings: it is a composition of freeform structure that follows the whims of the composer, and it is a medley of familiar themes broken by variations and interludes. The Moody canyons are fantasias: the stalwart walls of Wingate Sandstone are the beat of the music; the potpourri of abandoned meanders strewn along its path and its ceaseless walls draped with iridescent-purple desert varnish are the flights of fancy.
The route comes in two parts. Part 1 starts on the Moody road and goes down Middle Moody Canyon and Moody Creek to the Escalante River. A short walk on a horse trail leads downriver to East Moody Canyon, which is followed up to the West Fork of East Moody Canyon. An old mining road leads out of this canyon back to the trailhead.
Part 2 leaves the standard route at the mouth of East Moody Canyon and goes down the Escalante River for several miles to a devious route out of the canyon to the benchlands above. A complex and energetic route leads over broken country to the head of East Moody Canyon, which is followed to its confluence with the West Fork of East Moody Canyon where it joins the standard route.
Part 1: Down Middle Moody Canyon
(Horse Pasture Mesa map and Map Forty-six.) From the "No Vehicles" sign walk a few yards southeast into a shallow canyon. Follow it down, working over and around several large boulders (Class 3) to the floor of the inner gorge of Middle Moody Canyon. Across the canyon, to the southeast, is a long, low horizontal cave. On its right side is a ledge system that leads up to a small drainage. This will be the return route at the end of the trip.
Hike downcanyon by thick stands of rabbitbrush and Apache plume. (Scorpion Gulch map.) After a short walk, cottonwoods and tamarisks denote an area of medium springs. The walls of these narrows are the Shinarump Member of the Chinle Formation and contain a fascinating array of sculpted patterns. When the inner gorge ends, exit the canyon on the right and follow an old mining track downcanyon.
Historical note: The Moody canyons were named not for their temperament but for John Moody, one of the first settlers in the town of Escalante. His second daughter, Etta, is credited with being the first child born in Escalante, in 1876.
The track ends soon. Follow the wash downcanyon through colorful Chinle hills. Before you reach the main fork of Moody