Man in the EscalanteThe Historic Period
What men had passed through this wilderness of rivers and canyons and left these names on the land? . . . Was there a history here to match the lavish beauty of the canyon?
C. Gregory Crampton, 1986
The present townsite of Escalante was discovered in August 1866 by a Mormon cavalry unit led by Captain James Andrus. He had been assigned the task of locating Indian trails between Utah's Dixie (extreme southwestern Utah) and the Colorado River to the east and hunting for a group of Indians who had been harassing and stealing from Mormon settlers as part of what was called the Black Hawk War. Andrus called the area Potato or Spuds Valley because of the many wild potatoes he found there.
The next white man to visit Potato Valley was Jacob Hamblin, the famous Mormon explorer and missionary to the Indians. He passed through the area in 1871 while trying to carry supplies to the mouth of the Dirty Devil River for John Wesley Powell's second Colorado River expedition. Thinking he was on the Dirty Devil River, Hamblin led his group down the Escalante River for about fifty miles. The trip was described as a terrible one and the group was finally stopped by quicksand and boulders. Hamblin looked in vain for a way out of the canyon before being forced to retrace his steps and return to his starting point in Paria.
After Hamblin's failure to reach the Dirty Devil River, Frederick Dellenbaugh and Almon Thompson, members of the second Powell expedition, were assigned the task of finding the Dirty Devil and getting supplies to Powell. They worked their way over what are now called the Escalante Mountains and dropped into Potato Valley.
Like Hamblin, Dellenbaugh and Thompson thought the stream running through the valley was the Dirt Devil River. They followed it downcanyon to the mouth of what they called Rocky Gulch (Harris Wash) and camped. Frederick Dellenbaugh wrote in his diary: ''Prof. [Almon Thompson] and Dodds then climbed to where they could get a wider view . . . Prof. perceived at once that we were not on the river we thought we were on, for by this explanation he saw that the stream we were trying to descend flowed into the Colorado far to the south-west of the Unknown [Henry] Mountain, whereas he knew positively that the Dirty Devil came in on the north-east. Then the question was, 'What river is this?' for we had not noted a tributary of any size between the Dirty Devil and the San Juan. It was a new river whose identity had not been fathomed." The